Experiments to study xenon behavior in the reactor
system were concluded early in the report period.
Significant effects of circulating void fraction and cover
gas solubility on xenon poisoning are still being
evaluated. After completion of the xenon studies, the
reactor was operated at high power for a month to
facilitate the fission product deposition studies. This
continued operation at power required the addition of
more fissile material to the fuel. Six capsules of
plutonium were added through the sampler-enricher, demonstrating the suitability of plutomum as
an molten salt reactor makeup fuel. Enrichments were also made with
Uranium-233. The remote gamma-ray spectrometer was used extensively, with the reactor operating and during shut-downs, to study fission product behavior. The on-power studies provided additional information on nuclides
with relatively short half-lives. Measurements were
made on primary-system components, the reactor off-gas line, and samples exposed in the pump bowl.
Extensive use was also made of the fuel sampler during
the last two runs, both to expose materials in the pump
bowl and to remove salt and cover gas samples. Subjects
of particular interest were the effect of the oxidation-reduction state of the salt on fission product behavior
and salt properties and fission product transport to the
off-gas system.

Data were collected in the final power run in an effort
to establish a tritium balance for the molten salt reactor experiment. Results
indicated that 60 to 70 percent of the tritium produced in the
fuel loop goes out through the fuel off-gas system.
Other special measurements were made to improve the
heat-balance power calibration of the system.

After the final reactor shutdown, a leak developed in
the drain-line piping which released a small amount of
activity into the secondary containment. The leak was
stopped by freezing salt in the drain tank freeze valves;
then the secondary containment was cleared by venting
the activity (mostly xenon and krypton) through filters
to the stack. With the fuel salt secured, the specimen
array was removed from the core, and the reactor
system was shut down completely.

Reactor physics studies were continued, relating to
the effects of revisions in nuclear data on the calculation and interpretation of molten salt reactor experiment nuclear performance
characteristics. This work was extended to include a
comparison of results of using various computing
techniques to perform the basic neutronics calculations.
The study focused on the sensitivity of calculated
multiplication factors and spectrum-averaged capture-to-absotption ratios for fissile materials to assumptions
in the neutronics model and the computer programs
used, Significant differences occurred in the calculated
multiplication factors, which appeared to arise mainly 
from differences in calculated transport cross sections 
and their associated effects on molten salt reactor experiment neutron leakage.
The capture-to-absorption ratios, however, were found
to be much less sensitive to these effects and to depend
mainly on the underlying cross-section libraries for the 
fissile materials.

An examination was also made of the effects of
revisions in nuclear data on the interpretation of
reactivity trends during the Uranium-235 operating history. All
reactivity balance data logged at very low power over
this period were modified to reflect the nuclear data 
revisions and to include certain corrections in interpretation of the absolute magnitudes of several reactivity effects. The net result of all changes left the maximum variation in residual reactivity quite small
during the entire operation with Uranium-235 and within the region of validity of the reactivity
balance model.


The freeze flange thermal cycle test was discontinued
after 540 cycles. An inspection was made after cycle
470 which showed some changes in the cracklike
pattern at the alignment stub in the main flange.
However, as in all previous inspections, there were no
indications in locations that would cause concern. The
effects of flange cleaning procedures on the dye-
penetrant indications are being examined. '

The mark 2 fuel pump has now operated 12,744 hours
with molten salt. A new filter was installed in the
off-gas line. Small salt particles are continuing to collect
on the filter.

Comparisons were made between the xenon poisoning
observed in the molten salt reactor experiment and that predicted by a
mathematical model developed in 1967 which ignored
any effects of cover gas solubility. The model fits the
observed behavior with argon cover gas much more
closely than that with helium. The divergence with
helium at low circulating void fractions is tentatively
ascribed to effects of helium solubility in the salt.

Most of the reactor instrumentation performed
normally during the final periods of operation. However, two unscheduled power
reductions were caused by dirty relay contacts in the load-scram circuits. Some
changes were made in parts of the reactor containment
system to provide protection for the tritium sampling operations. The entire instrument system, including the
on-line digital computer, was placed in standby operation after the final reactor shutdown.

The only significant change made in the molten salt breeder reactor
reference design was the addition of a 2500 feet storage
tank for the fuel salt. This tank would be used in the
event that repairs are needed on the primary drain tank.
The storage tank is located in the chemical processing
cell and has a 1-Megawatt heat removal system very
similar to that used in the molten salt reactor experiment drain tank.

Partial load operation and startup and shutdown
procedures for the reference molten salt breeder reactor were given preliminary study, and it was concluded that these special
conditions would not add undue operating complexity or an unreasonable amount of equipment. Starting from
the cold condition involves use of the cell electric
heaters and circulation of helium inside the salt loops to
preheat the system to about 1000 degrees Fahrenheit prior to filling
them with salt from the drain tanks. The steam system
equipment is preheated by steam furnished from a
supercritical-pressure, 1000 degrees Fahrenheit auxiliary boiler fired by
oil or gas. The steam generators are raised to essentially
operating temperature before the coolant salt circulation is started. Generated steam is bypassed to the
turbine condenser through a desuperheater until about
8 percent reactor load level is reached and the main turbines
are brought up to speed. At about 20 percent load the control
mode is essentially that for full-load operation with the
reactor outlet temperature a function of the plant load.

On loss of turbine load, steam would be let down
through an extraction valve to the desuperheater and
thence to the main turbine condenser. A portion of the
steam would be used to continue operation of the
boiler feed-pump turbine to maintain water circulation
through the steam generators for removal of heat from
the secondary salt. Another portion of the steam, if
required, would be used to drive the standby power
turbine-generator set to allow continued operation of
the salt circulating pumps and as many as are needed of
the main condensing water supply and feedwater
pressure-booster pumps. In this hot standby condition,
the plant would require relatlvely little time to again
assume the system load.

For normal shutdown the generator load is reduced
until the system is essentially in the hot standby mode
described above. Feedwater is supplied to as many of
the steam generators as are required to remove the
reactor afterheat. After about ten days the fuel salt is
transferred to the primary drain tank and the steam
system is allowed to cool.
With completion of the molten salt breeder reactor reference design,
preliminary studies could be made of molten-salt
reactor types in which fuel conservation is given
reduced emphasis and higher priority is given to
simplifying the reactor plant and its operation. Although the reactors would not have highest performance as breeders, they would have high conversion
ratios, and fuel cycle costs would be low enough to
compete favorably with other converter reactors. They
could use either Uranium-235 or plutonium as the fissile fuel.
Design and operation of these simplified molten-salt
reactors would yield valuable experience directly applicable to the high-performance breeders to follow. The
plants would be simplified in two major areas: the
treatment of the fuel salt would consist simply in
recovery of uranium by fluoride volatility and discard
of the carrier salt after it became too contaminated for
economical operation; lower power densities in the
reactor core would allow a graphite life equal to that of
the rest of the plant, thus simplifying the reactor
design, reducing the amount of equipment needed for
core maintenance, and moderating the risks and nuisances involved in disposal of a series of spent reactor cores.

One of these first-generation-type molten-salt reactors
given particular study has a relatively large core (26 feet
in diameter and 26 feet high) with graphite core elements
and flow arrangements very similar to those used in the
molten salt reactor experiment. The graphite is constrained in position by grids
at the top and bottom, and a 2 and a half foot thick graphite
reflector is provided for neutron economy and vessel
wall protection. The core graphite would not normally
require replacement over the 30-year life of the plant.

Another of the simplified types of molten-salt reactors given brief study has a spherical reactor vessel
containing 6 inch diameter graphite spheres as the moderator.
Removal and replacement of the balls would probably
be easier than handling the long graphite prisms used in
other designs,but the concept has the disadvantage that
the salt fraction in the packed bed is about 0.37, too
high to be economical when the core is made large
enough to obtain a 30-year life.

The primary heat exchangers used in the molten salt breeder reactor
reference design are of the shell-and-tube type, and the
only practical maintenance method for repairing tube
leaks would be replacement of the tube bundle. A brief study was made of a different heat exchanger concept
employing bayonet-type tubes which could be repaired
individually. The inventory of fuel salt held in the heat
exchanger tubes would be increased by about 30 percent, but
the design may have merit, particularly in that the
bayonet-tube construction would: greatly reduce the
estimated amount of tritium reaching the steam system.

A preliminary study was made of the distribution of
tritium in 1000 Megawatt molten salt breeder reactor power stations. About
2420 curies per day of tritium would be produced, primarily due to the neutron and alpha reactions associated with the
lithium in the fuel salt. A large percentage of the
production might reach the steam system in the molten salt breeder reactor
reference design, but increasing the system purge gas-flow rates and the tube wall resistances and taking
advantage of the chemical characteristics of the fluoroborate secondary salt could sharply reduce the amount.
Further studies are being made of the behavior of tritium.

A new fuel cycle analysis for the reference single-fluid
molten salt breeder reactor takes into account small modifications in system
description, salt composition, and treatment of chemical processing that have occurred since the previous
progress report. In addition, the quoted fuel cycle cost
now includes the cost of replacing core graphite because
of radiation damage effects.

A small amount of reactivity control can be achieved
in an molten salt breeder reactor, without any loss of neutrons by capture in
unproductive control poisons, by using graphite rods to
displace fuel salt from circular passages in the graphite
moderator. Because the effect of such rods, even if
centrally located in the core, is expected to be quite
small, and because self-shielding effects of neutron
resonance cross sections are expected to be rather
complex and important, reactivity worth calculations
for such rods have been performed with the help of
advanced Monte Carlo methods. The calculated reactivity effect of four such rods 4 inch in diameter grouped
around the core center line is calculated to be about
0.33 percent (roughly 2 dollars in reactivity), and the calculations suggest that the effect of a smaller number of rods
is proportional to their number.

Fuel cycle calculations for several conceptual designs of molten salt converter reactors indicate that variations
in design permitting 30 year operation without graphite
replacement, as well as variations in fuel cycle which
permit operation without continuous chemical processing, may produce quite small increases in fuel cycle
cost relative to the reference molten salt breeder reactor. A large converter
reactor with a structure similar to that of the molten salt reactor experiment
and requiring neither graphite replacement nor chemical
processing (other than batch fluorination of the salt for
uranium recovery) is estimated to have a fuel cycle cost
approximately 0.1 mills per kilowatthours greater than that of the reference
molten salt breeder reactor. Such reactors can effectively utilize plutonium
discharged from water-moderated reactors.
Calculations of the fuel conversion ratio were carried out for different rates of chemical processing and for
different fissile feed materials for cases in which the conversion ratio is
less than 1. The results illustrate the importance of
rapid removal of Protactinium-233 as well as of fission products
and indicate that plutonium discharged from light-water
reactors should be a very satisfactory fuel for molten salt converter reactors.

Detailed consideration of fuel depletion, Uranium-236 build-up, and time-dependent Protactinium-240/Protactinium-239 ratios, as well as
a careful reexamination of heat balances, now indicates
that nominal full power of the molten salt reactor experiment was about 7.25 Megawatts,
rather than 8 Megawatts as previously believed.

An effect of heaf flux on the axial
temperature profile with a proposed molten salt breeder reactor melt (Lithium fluoride-Beryllium fluoride-Thorium tetrafluoride-Uranium tetrafluoride; 67.5-20-12-0.5 mole percent) was observed
in heat transfer tests in the low transitional flow range
(Reynolds modulus approximately 4000). The effect was manifested as a variation in the distance from the
inlet of the heated test section to the position at which
the local heat transfer coefficient became nearly independent of length; this effect is believed to be related to
the reduction in fluid viscosity near the wall due to heat
transfer from the wall to the fluid.

An attempt to obtain heat transfer measurements in
the low-Reynolds-modulus range with the test section
oriented vertically for evaluation of possible natural convection effects was unsuccessful due to numerous 
salt leaks. A few  preliminary runs were made with
Reynolds moduli between 6000 and 12,000, where
natural convection effects should not be significant.
The heat transfer coefficients with upflow were about
12 percent lower than with downflow, but the difference can
be explained by errors in measurement of inlet and
outlet fluid temperatures. Additional runs were made
with the test section reoriented horizontally, preparatory to experiments with the more soluble gas helium
replacing argon as cover gas.

The variable-gap thermal conductivity apparatus was improved by the
addition of a heat meter. The heat leaving the specimen
can now be determined by measurement of the axial
temperature gradient in the heat meter and computation of heat losses based on a two-dimensional heat-flow model. The modified apparatus will be used to
systematically study the thermal conductivity of fluo-
ride salt mixtures containing Lithium Fluoride, Beryllium fluoride, and Thorium tetrafluoride over
a wide range of compositions. From these measurements it is hoped to develop means for estimating the
conductivities of the molten fluoride salt mixtures
having these same constituents.

Successful operation of the mass transfer apparatus enabled
preliminary tests to be carried out for determination of
the characteristics of the helium bubbles as a function
of liquid flow rate, gas flow rate, generator probe position, and surfactant concentration. The bubble size
distribution was well described by a log-normal probability function. It was also possible in the preliminary
tests to establish the operating limits of the system with
respect to the Reynolds and Schmidt moduli and the void fraction, and it was concluded that sufficient
ranges of the primary variables were achieved to yield
useful correlations of these variables in a fractional
factorial experiment. It is significant that the expected
linear variation in log concentration with time was
observed in experiments with water and with water
containing a surfactant. The loop transit time, the
interfacial area per unit volume (from analysis of the
bubble photographs), and the mass transfer coefficient
can be obtained from this linear variation.

With the essential completion of the survey of
 radiation behavior of commercially available graphites,
the emphasis is turning increasingly to fabrication
studies and a better understanding of the underlying
phenomena. From a fundamental point of view, electron bombardment of graphite single crystals in the
electron microscope is proving to be an extremely
useful tool. Quantitative results on interstitial cluster
generation await better calibration of the microscope
operating characteristics, but the displacement energy is
being redetermined, and an upper limit of about 30 electron volts
has been established.

Irradiation studies on bulk artificial graphites are
continuing, with recent efforts on lamp- and furnace-
black base materials and samples fabricated.
In the latter program, preliminary fabrications have
been attempted using JOZ, air-blown, and Santa Maria
graphite . powders as filler materials. The air-blown
material looks most promising, at least from the
standpoint of isotropy.

Alloys containing from O to 1 percent titanium were aged
for 1500 hour at 760 degrees Celsius and tested at 650 degrees Celsius. Generally,
the ductility and strength were increased. When alloys
containing from 10 to 20 percent molybdenum were aged, the
strength increased and the ductility decreased. An
irradiation experiment at 550 degrees Celsius involving six alloys
with titanium levels of 0.6, 0.9, and 1.2 percent each with
carbon levels of 0.03 and 0.08 percent showed generally that
the postirradiation creep properties at 650 degrees Celsius improved
with increasing titanium and carbon levels. Postirradiation expenments on alloys irradiated at 760 degrees Celsius and
containing various amounts of Titanium, Hafnium, Niobium, and Silicon are
incomplete, but the desired levels of these elements are
being better defined. Silicon must be kept low in these
alloys to obtain good properties, the precise maximum
level likely being about 0.1 percent. This undesirable effect of
silicon is associated with its tendency to form very
coarse carbides. None of the modified alloys
except those containing zirconium have given welding
problems to date.

The corrosion rate of Hastelloy Nickel in sodium fluoroborate has been shown to be very dependent upon the
water content of the salt, However, natural-circulation
loops have continued to operate under conditions
where steam was injected to cause a very high corrosion
rate. A forced-convection loop constructed of Hastelloy
Nickel with sodium fluoroborate has operated over 6700 hours with an average corrosion rate of 1.2 mils per year and a
rate during the last 2000 hours of operation of 0.7
mil per year. A process whereby BF3; and HF are bubbled
through liquid fluoroborate was effective in removing
water. Hastelloy Nickel was exposed to steam at 3500 pounds square inch
and 538 degrees Celsius for 2000 hour, and the average corrosion rate
was about 0.1 mil per year.

Back extrusion offers several advantages as a technique for fabricating containers of molybdenum. We
have produced several 2.5 inch diameter capsules which have
excellent surface finishes and flow patterns.

Three tube-to-header molybdenum welds were made
in a glove box by the gas tungsten-arc process, and no
evidence of flaws was detected. The orbiting automatic
gas tungsten-arc process is being evaluated as a technique for field welding of molybdenum.
We have shown that braze alloy composition and joint
design affect the compatibility of braze alloys with
bismuth. Less attack by bismuth was observed in a
molybdenum lap joint brazed with an Iron, Carbon, Boron alloy than
in a T-joint brazed with the same alloy. The addition of molybdenum to Iron, Boron, Carbon braze alloys also improved their
corrosxon resistance.

Molybdenum and TZM were unattacked by bismuth
after 3000 hour exposure in a quartz thermal convection

loop test at 700 degrees Celsius with a delta T of 95 plus or minus 5 degrees Celsius. Severe
dissolution and mass transfer of niobium and Niobium 1 percent
Zirconium alloy was observed after only 115 hours under similar
conditions.

The adherence of tungsten coatings to conventional
alloy substrates has been found to be related to
substrate composmon rather than to differences in
thermal expansion between tungsten and the substrate.
Bond adherence was evaluated by thermal cycling,
spiral bend tests, and tensile tests.

The effectiveness of several commercial coatmgs in
preventing oxidation and scaling of carbon steel during
thermal cycling from 650 degrees Celsius was evaluated. Croloys
having from 1.1 to 8.7 weight percent chromium were also
thermally cycled from 650 degrees Celsius, and it was concluded
that more than 5 percent chromium is requn'ed for improved
oxidation behavior.

Welding parameters have been established_ that ensure
good root passes in Hastelloy being welded by remote welding equipment. Welds of high quality were obtained when the misalignment was as much as three eights inch. A failed pressure measuring device from a sodium fluoroborate pump loop has been examined. The failure
seemed due to the corrosion of a brazing alloy that had
been used in repairing a faulty weld. Four potential
bearing materials have been plasma sprayed on Hastelloy N by a commercial vendor. These coated samples
have been thermal cycled and seem reasonably stable,
The five failures that have been observed may be
associated with oxides that are present.

We have devised a new process known as the metal
transfer process for removing rare-earth and alkaline-earth fission products from the fuel salt of a single-fluid
molten salt breeder reactor. The process uses bismuth for transporting the
rare earths from the fuel salt to an acceptor salt such as
Lithium Chloride; the rare earths are then removed from the Lithium Chloride by
contact with bismuth containing 0.05 to 0.50 mole
fraction lithium.

The effective thonum—rare-earth separation factors
for the various rare earths range from about 10 to the four to
about 10 to the eight. The new process does not require an
electrolytic cell. This is an important advantage over the
earlier reductive extraction process, which also had the
disadvantage of separation factors near unity.

A new process for isolating protactinium from a
single-fluid molten salt breeder reactor has been developed. This process
consists of fluorination of the salt to remove the
uranium followed by reductive extraction to isolate the
protactinium, Operation without an electrolytic cell is possible since the cost of the reductant (lithium or
thorium) is acceptably low. The process is highly
efficient, quite stable with respect to variations in
operating conditions, and requires a uranium removal efficiency in the fluorinator of less than 90 percent.

Minor modifications to the salt overflow from the
extraction column had the desired effect of improving
the flow control of both the bismuth and the salt
streams. Four hydrodynamic experiments (runs 5—8)
were made with the column. Run 5 was highly
successful in that stable flow rates of about 80 milliliters per minute were observed for each phase. Succeeding runs were
increasingly plagued by the formation of porous iron
plugs, which resulted from mass transfer of iron from
‘the carbon steel piping. The extraction column was
replaced by a new column packed with quarters inch Raschig rings because of increased resistance to flow in the
original column. This increase in resistance was probably caused by the deposition of iron within the
interstices of the quarter inch solid cylindrical packing.

Before the final hydrodynamic experiment was made
in the original column, zirconium metal was added to
the bismuth for the purpose of inhibiting mass transfer of iron in bismuth.

Experimental difficulties have been caused by using
carbon steel as the material of construction for reductive extraction systems handling bismuth. Significant progress in molybdenum fabrication techniques has led to the decision to build a small molybdenum reductive
extraction system consisting of a packed extraction
column with gaslift recirculation systems for pumping
bismuth and salt through the column. A capital fund
request has been approved for the project. The preliminary design is under way, and metallurgical and
fabrication problems are being investigated.

A bismuth-salt interface detector is required for
control of the interface location in salt-metal extraction columns. Equipment has been assembled for testing
eddy-current detectors for this application.

A study of pressure drop, holdup, and flooding rates
in a 2 inch inner diameter packed column was completed. Mercury
and water were used to simulate bismuth and molten
salt. Two different packing materials were studied: quarter inch solid cylindrical packing and three eighths inch Raschig rings.

The data obtained with the quarter inch packing agreed well
with earlier data obtained with this packing in a
1 inch diameter column.

We are studying modifications of packed columns which will decrease the effect of axial mixing and
thereby improve column performance. The proposed modifications involve placing devices at various points
along the column to reduce axial mixing across the
column at those points. Two designs for “backflow
preventers” have been tested; these preventers resemble inverted bubble caps. The experiments demonstrated
that relatively simple devices are capable of reducing
backmixing to an acceptable level (less than 15 percent of the
net continuous-phase flow rate).

We have developed an empirical relation that predicts the effect of axial mixing in both phases on the
performance of a countercurrent contactor.
A study of axial mixing in a 2 inch diameter open column
using air and aqueous solutions of glycerol or butanol, was made in support of continuous fluorinator development. Data were obtained on the effects of the viscosity and the surface tension of the continuous phase.
Equipment has been fabricated for the study and
demonstration of the metal transfer process for removing rare earths from single-fluid molten salt breeder reactor fuel salt. A
quartz pump for circulating Lithium Chloride operated satisfactorily, although the tests showed the need for improved
methods for the initial purification of the Lithium Chloride in order
to prevent attack of the quartz.
Radio-frequency heating is being considered as a
method for generating heat in nonradioactive molten
salt in studies of frozen-wall fluorinators. Approximate
expressions for the rate of heat generation in molten
salt and in an adjacent metal wall were derived; the general validity of these expressions was substantiated
in tests with a system in which sulfuric acid was used as
a substitute for molten salt. Radio-frequency heating
appears to be practical for nonradioactive experiments,
although a number of problems with this approach must still be solved.

Several of the proposed ﬂowsheets for processing molten salt breeder reactor fuel salt require the use of electrolytlc cells, and
the study and development of such cells is under way.
To date, experimental work has been carried out in
static cells. However, a facility that will allow cells to be
tested under flow conditions at steady state is presently
nearing completion.

In tests with static cells, it was shown that a layer of
frozen salt can be maintained in the presence of high
current densities if sufficient cooling is provided.
Experiments with static cells were also carried out to
identify the source of the black material that has
formed in the salt during all the runs made thus far. It
was concluded that an alternating currnet component in the nominal direct current
power supply was not responsible for the formation of
dark material and that the dark material does not form
at cell temperatures of 675 to 680 degrees Celsius. It was also shown
that a dark material was formed in the absence of
bismuth.

Final analyses were obtained for the 11 condensate
samples taken during the molten salt reactor experiment distillation experiment.
The effective relative volatilities (with respect to Lithium Fluoride)
of the major components and Zirconium tetrafluoride, were essentially
constant during the run and agreed with earlier measurements from equilibrium stills. However, the effective
relative volatilities of the alkaline-earth and rare-earth
fission products were substantially higher (one to two
orders of magnitude) than values measured in equilibrium stills. Contamination of samples during analysis
is suspected.

Material and energy balance calculations for the
reductive extraction process show that about 10 megawatt of heat is generated in the chemical processing plant at
equilibrium operation. This heat rate is about evenly
divided between Protactinium-233 decay and fission product
decay. A series of calculations was performed to investigate
the effect of the removal of individual fission product
elements on the performance of an molten salt breeder reactor. Changes in
the fuel yield and fuel cycle cost are given as functions
of element removal time for the most important fission
product elements.