One of the prime ob]ectlves of the high-power operation was to obtain a very accurate measurement of
the Uranium-233 ratio. For this purpose samples were
taken after 0.5, 1.8, and 2.9 percent burnup of the Uranium-233.
Experiments were conducted during this period on the
behavior of cover gas and xenon in the fuel salt at
various fuel circulation rates. Reductants and an oxidant were added to the fuel salt and numerous samples
were taken to investigate the physical and chemical
behavior of the fuel mixture. During the reactor operation, a small amount of fuel carrier salt, stripped
of its uranium during the fluorination in 1968, was
transferred to the distillation experiment set up in the
reactor building.

There were no significant delays in the experimental
program due to equipment problems, although recurrent plugging in the off-gas system required some
attention. An indication of the absence of serious
problems is that from January to June 1, the reactor
was critical 95 percent of the time.

During the shutdown, core specimens were removed
and a different array installed, control rod drives were repaired or replaced, one control rod was replaced and
the off-gas lines were cleared either by heating and
blowing or (in the case of the overflow tank vent) by
replacing a plugged valve. Large amounts of data on
fission product distributions were obtained by remote
gamma spectrometry during the shutdown and the
subsequent startup. (The measurements during the
startup were through holes drilled in the shield during
the shutdown).

The valves most important to primary containment
were tested during the shutdown, and just before the
startup the secondary containment was tested at 20
pounds square inch. Pressure tests of the fuel and coolant salt systems
at 60 pounds square inch were performed during five days of flush-salt
circulation.

The first experiments after the startup were aimed at
the behavior of cover gas in the flush and fuel salts and
its effect on xenon poisoning. Significant differences
were observed between helium and argon.

Because some cross sections have been revised since
the physics analysis of the molten salt reactor with Uranium-235 was made,
the analysis was repeated using the more up-to-date
values. Reaction cross sections averaged over the neutron energy spectrum and fuel volume were recalculated
for a number of nuclides in the salt, and the variation in
these cross sections with the reactor operating conditions was studied. Some differences in the average cross
sections for Uranium-235, Uranium-238, and Plutonium-239 were found. These
differences change the calculated critical Uranium-235 concentration by a maximum of about 2 percent and thus have a
relatively insignificant effect on the interpretation of
the critical experiment. However, increases in the
average Uranium-238 absorption cross section led to an increase
of nearly 5 percent in the calculated net depletion rate of
uranium for a specified fission rate in the reactor and
about a 20 percent increase in the plutonium production rate.

The freeze flange thermal cycle test was continued
with no external damage through cycle 400, when it
was shut down for internal inspection and minor
repairs. A fluorescent dye penetrant more sensitive than
the one previously used gave a completely new pattern
of fatigue cracks and porosity indications. None of the
indications are in the locatrons Whlch would cause
concern.
The much improved remote gamma spectrometer
system was put into operation and performed as
planned.
In connection with the development of off-gas
systems, a model based on conventional mass transfer
concepts was developed in an attempt to describe
quantitatively the migration of noble metals in the
molten salt reactor experiment.

Operation of the Mark 2 fuel pump with molten salt at 1200 degrees Fahrenheit and 1350 gallons per minute passed 8400 hours. After the pump tank operating liquid level was raised, void-fraction measurements indicated there was no detectable quantity of gas bubbles circulating in the salt, and the plugging rate in the off-gas line decreased considerably.

Efforts to improve reactor diagnosis by noise analysis
were hampered by limitations of the pressure-measuring
system. The analytical model used in the analysis was
verified, however, and it was shown that plugging in the
off-gas line could be detected at an early stage by
analysis of the pressure noise. Continuous indicators of
pressure and neutron noise levels were installed for use
by the reactor operators.

Only relatively minor maintenance and modifications
were required in the molten salt reactor experiment instruments and controls.

Major revisions were made to the molten salt breeder reactor building
design to provide a sealed 134 feet diameter cylindrical
reactor building with hemigpherical top to assure
against escape of airborne contaminants during reactor
core maintenance operations. The 3 feet thick concrete in
the building wall provides biological shielding during the maintenance and also serves as missile protection.

The core transport cask, now a part of the polar crane
serving the reactor building, has integral hoists for
lifeeting the reactor core into the cask and lowering it
into the spent-core storage pit.

As a result of a review of the resistance of the
building and equipment supports to seismic disturbances, the reactor plant now rests on a concrete pad
separate from the turbine plant. In this connection, the
availability of pipe supports with vibration-damping
dashpots suitable for high-temperature operation is
being investigated.

The new reactor building layout permits a waste cell
to be provided beneath the reactor cell for storage of a
30-year accumulation of discarded radioactive materials and equipment. The maximum heat generation in the
pit is about 600 kw, stemming primarily from chemical
processing wastes. The pit will be maintained at 150 degrees Fahrenheit, or below, by cooling a side stream of the nitrogen
atmosphere with a water-cooled heat exchanger. Duplicate equipment will be provided.

The primary salt drain tank was redesigned to provide
added reliability in the cooling system through use of
40 separate and autonomous circuits employing natural
circulation of a Lithium fluoride-Beryllium fluoride coolant salt through 1500
tubes in the drain tank and a salt-to-water heat exchanger located outside the drain
tank cell. Heat transfer in this exchanger is by radiation,
with no direct contact between the surfaces that could
result in water entering the salt system. The generated
steam is condensed in air-cooled finned coils in the base
of a 300- to 400-feet natural draft stack, and the
condensate is recirculated. The redesigned drain tank
also serves as a 2.5-hour holdup volume for decay of
off-gases taken from the primary system prior to their
treatment and disposal. The heat load due to the gases
is about 18 Megawatt.

The fuel salt circulating pump bowls overflow continuously into the drain tank. The 1213 degrees Fahrenheit incoming
salt from the pumps flows downward through a half inch
annular space at the tank wall to remove gamma heat
and to limit the maximum wall temperature to about
1261 degrees Fahrenheit. The fuel salt is continuously returned to the
primary loop by four jet pumps located in the bottom
of the primary drain tank. The drain tank thus achieves
added reliability through being an active part of the
primary system.

During the past report period an analysis of the
afterheat generation in a drained primary heat exchanger was initiated. Deposited noble-metal fission
products are the principal source of heat, with about 60
to 80 percent being due to gamma emission. Based on
extrapolation of the behavior of tellurium, which
appears to be typical of the gamma emitters, and
assuming that 40 percent of all noble metals are deposited on
heat exchanger surfaces, the fractional distribution of
the heat is about 60 percent in the tube annuli, 25 percent in the
intermediate shell, and 10 percent in the innermost  shell.
Reducing the size of the heat exchangers within the
range of interest does not significantly alter the fact
that about 90 percent of the gamma energy originating in the
tube annuh remams W1th1n the exchanger.

Neutronics calculations for the reference one-fluid
molten salt breeder reactor performed in explicit two-dimensional geometry
confirm the results obtained with the two-dimensional
synthesis technique employed in the optimization code.

Fuel-cycle calculations for molten-salt reactors both
larger and smaller than the reference 1000 Megawatt molten salt breeder reactor show a significant dependence of breeding
performance on reactor power level. Both breeding
ratio and annual fuel yield can be expected to increase a
full percentage point if power level can be raised to
2000 Megawatt (electrical) and nearly two points if the power
were increased to 4000 Megawatt (electrical).

Analysis of the effect of varying the average power
density for the 1000 Megawatt (electrical) molten salt breeder reactor shows that
the reference design, with an average power density of
22 Watts per cubic centimeter, is about optimum in terms of annual fuel
yield, although the conservation coefficient could be
improved slightly by increasing the power density. No
change in the reference design is contemplated, however, since the selection of core dimensions is partly
based on the lifetime of the core graphite, which is
limited by fast-neutron damage.

A new investigation of the potential performance of a
canned-core molten salt breeder reactor, in which a metallic or graphite
barrier separates the core from the blanket, indicates
significantly better breeding performance than for the
reference one-fluid concept, in spite of neutron captures in the barrier. Annual fuel yields twice that of the
reference design are indicated. If feasible from other
points of view, such a concept might thus provide a
useful line of development for future molten salt breeder reactor designs.

Gamma and neutron heating calculations were completed for the current one-fluid molten salt breeder reactor design.

A digital simulation code, involving a rather detailed
model of the reactor core as well as of the primary and
secondary heat exchange circuits, has been employed to
study the response of the molten salt breeder reactor to various reactivity
perturbations. Frequency response calculations for the
reference molten salt breeder reactor at full power show no tendencies to instability.

Additional calculations for various possible configurations of a molten-salt breeder experiment show that
breeding ratios near unity, with Uranium-233 fuel, could be
achieved with power levels of about 150 Megawatt (thermal)
and with a maximum core power density of about 100
watts per cubic centimeter

The measured value of the Uranium-235 capture-to-absorption cross-section ratio in-the molten salt reactor experiment is in
excellent agreement with the calculated value, providing
good confirmation of cross sections and computational
models used in molten salt breeder reactor design calculations. Similar
experiments are in progress for Uranium-233.

Pressure-drop measurements were made for four
models of the bubble generator, and contraction and
expansion coefficients were determined. Addition of a
surfactant, normal butyl alcohol, was shown to
markedly reduce the coalescence of bubbles in tests
with water.

The steam-generator industrial program consists of
four phases that will result in the design, development,
and fabrication of a full-size, full-length tube unit for
testing in the Prototype Tube Test Stand; an molten salt breeder experiment unit
for testing in the Engineering Test Unit; and the steam
generator for use in the molten salt breeder experiment. Phase I will produce a
conceptual design for use with the Oak Ridge National Laboratory reference
design of the 1000 Megawatt (electrical) molten salt breeder reactor. The salt
flows and temperatures for all operating conditions and
the steam and feedwater inlet and outlet temperatures
and pressures at full load will be specified by Oak Ridge National Laboratory
based on. the requirements for the prevention of
freezing of the salt or excessive thermal cycling of the
system components. An alternative conceptual design
will be made for the same salt conditions, but without
the restrictions on the steam system. The request for
directive for the steam generator prototype tube test
stand has been deferred pending completion of the
conceptual system design description and availability of
funds.

The Sodium tetrafluoroborate circulating test loop was operated for a
total of 3600 hours during the report period to continue
the investigation of problems associated with corrosion
product deposition and with off-gas system restrictions.
Seven  tests were made with the cold finger, and
chemical analyses made of green deposits obtained
during some of these tests indicated up to 8 percent
chromium. No definite conclusions were reached as to
the identity of the compounds forming the deposits. An
analysis of data on impurities found in salt samples
taken during circulation of the clean batch of salt
indicates that the solubility of iron at 1025 degrees Fahrenheit is
500-550 parts per million. The analytical results for oxygen and
water in the salt have a low level of confidence. A hot
trap for retention of salt mist was found to have about
a 50 percent efficiency using either of two different internal
arrangements. An examination of several possible
sources indicated that emissions of acid fluid were
resulting from contamination of the system with wet air
during routine operational and maintenance activities.

Programmatic approval was received from the AEC to
proceed with the design of.the molten salt breeder experiment salt pump test
stand. The conceptual system design description of the stand was completed and released for distribution. The
preliminary design has been started and is scheduled for
completion by November 1969.

The detail design of the ALPHA pump (for up to
30-gallons per minute use in test loops) was completed, and the
fabrication of the water test pump was initiated. Water
tests will be performed to determine the pump hydraulic characteristics and to control the fountain
leakage from its entrance into the pump tank to its
return to the impeller inlet.

Performance tests were conducted with the plpe
cutting and welding devices developed and fabricated as
modifications of equipment designed for the U.S. Air
Force by North American Rockwell Corporation.
Cutter performance tests included saw tracking and
runout determinations and machining studies on stain-
less steel and Inconel piping. Life expectancy of the
cutter blades was determined for various tools, material,
and cutter speeds. A machining technique was developed for remotely preparing J-bevel pipe ends for
welding. Some tests were started on repairing weld
defects.

The analog model of the 1000 Megawatt (electrical) molten salt breeder reactor
is being refined and expanded to include additional
nodes for more accurate simulation and more recent
data from the project for calculation of important
coefficients. The new model includes considerable
latitude for trying different control schemes and should be representative of expected performance over a wider range of power levels.
As an adjunct to the transient snnulatlon a study is
being made of steady-state part-load plant conditions to
determine suitable profiles of temperature and flow
within the limits imposed by salt freezing and pump
capabilities.

New heat transfer results have been
obtained with a proposed molten salt breeder reactor fuel salt (Lithium fluoride-Beryllium fluoride-Thorium tetrafluoride-Uranium tetrafluoride, 67.5-20-12-0.5 mole percent). In the recent experiments a replacement test section was used because the original one may have caused flow disturbances leading to irregular axlal wall temperature profiles.

The new results in the lower lammar ﬂow reglon (Reynolds modulus less than 1000) and in the
upper transition and turbulent flow regions (greater than 3500) were characterized by regular axial
temperature profiles indicative of developing flow in
the laminar region and fully developed flow in the transition and turbulent regions. The existence of fully
developed flow is in marked contrast with the results
obtained using the original test section, which suggested
flow transition effects extending the full length of the
tube. The axial temperature profiles, together with the
corresponding bulk liquid temperatures were employed
to derive heat transfer coefficients and Nusselt moduli
for comparison with the published correlations of
Sieder and Tate for laminar and turbulent flow,
Martinelli- and Boelter for laminar flow, McAdams for
turbulent flow, Colbum for turbulent flow, and Hausen
for transitional flow. The data agree best with the
equation of Sieder and Tate in the low laminar range
and with that of Colburn in the turbulent range
greater than 12,000.

The effect of heat shunting around the specimen in the present variable gap thermal-conductivity apparatus on the measured
thermal conductivity has been analyzed. A correction factor
has been derived which depends on gap spacing, specimen conductivity, and the fixed thermal resistance
of the gap. Applied to the measured conductivities of
the calibration fluids water, Hitec salt, and mercury,
this correction factor brings the results into good
agreement with accepted published values. The measured conductivities of the molten salt reactor experiment fuel and coolant salts
and proposed molten salt breeder reactor fuel and coolant salts have likewise
been corrected, resulting in a small decrease from
previously published values.

Shakedown tests of the experimental facility revealed some problems with the pump and heat exchanger, which are
being corrected. The facility incorporates a variable-area
nozzle with gas injection into the throat for bubble
generation and a bubble separator which combines
centripetal and gravitational separation with the barrier
effect of a wetted screen. A theoretical description of
the mass transfer process is under development which
assumes that a bubble moves at the local velocity of the
liquid and that the flow field near the bubble-liquid
interface is primarily the turbulence fluctuations. An
improved eddy diffusivity method is being investigated
which relates this parameter to the mean flow, concentration gradient, and interfacial boundary conditions.



The compatibility of Hastelloy Nickel with several fluoride salts is being studied, with primary emphasis on the
coolant salt sodium fluoroborate. The corrosion rate is
accelerated by the presence of moisture. A pump loop
containing  coolant salt with 1500 parts per million water has
corroded at an average rate of 1.3 mils per year for 4000
hours. Observations on a thermal convection loop containing fertile-fissile salt with a bismuth appendage show
that the corrosion behavior is not affected appreciably,
although detectable quantities of bismuth moved into
the salt stream and metal impurities were extracted
from the salt stream by the bismuth.
Corrosion data for Hastelloy Nickel in steam are very
meager, and we have installed a facility in the Bull Run
Steam Plant for obtaining such information. 

We have deposited coatings of tungsten on plain
carbon steels and type 304 stainless steel in an effort to
obtain materials that have good corrosion resistance in
bismuth. Tungsten has a lower coefficient of thermal
expansion than these steels, and the coatings spall
during thermal cycling. We are attempting to reduce the
spalling problem by varying the coating parameters and
by using other substrate materials wnth lower expansion.

The primary problem with using molybdenum for a
chemical processing plant is the ability to join this
material. Welds are extremely brittle, and the base
metal even becomes brittle at room temperature when
it is fully recrystallized. Early compability tests on an
alloy of iron, boron, and carbon look promising.

Distribution of actinide and lanthanide elements
between molten fluoride salts and liquid bismuth
solutions is being studied as part of the development of
a reductive extraction process for single-fluid molten salt breeder reactor
fuels. Equilibrium data obtained at 600 degrees Celsius with Lithium fluoride-Beryllium fluoride-Thorium tetrafluoride (72-16-12 mole  percent) show that the uranium-neptunium separation factor is about 3, that plutonium,
americium, and californium are nearly inseparable, and
that the plutonium-curium separation factor is about
10. Studies with several rare earths showed that the
rare-earth—thorium separation factors (1 to 3.5) are not
markedly temperature dependent in the range 525 to
750 degrees Celsius. Selective precipitation of thorium bismuthide
from thorium—bismuth—rare-earth solutions is being
evaluated as a means of enhancing the overall rare-earth—thorium separation factors in the reductive
extraction process.

Since plutonium will be added to the present molten salt reactor experiment
fuel salt as P powder, tests were conducted to
demonstrate that powdered Plutonium trifluoride would dissolve
rapidly in Lithium fluoride-Beryllium fluoride (66-34 mole  percent) at about 600 degrees Celsius. In
addition, values for the solubility of Plutonium trifluoride in this salt at
several temperatures were conﬁrmed.

Calculations have been continued on several aspects
of the flowsheet proposed for processing single-fluid
molten salt breeder reactor’s. Steadystate calculations indicate that isolation of protactinium is feasible for a reactor fueled with
either uranium or plutonium. Approximately 90 percent of
the protactinium in the reactor system could be
retained in a salt volume of 200 feet. Calculations on the
transient performance of a reactor fueled with uranium
indicate that the relatively large protactinium decay
tank tends to stabilize the isolation system and that the
system can be controlled by determination of the
uranium concentration in the salt entering the decay.

Calculations on the removal of rare earths by reductive extraction indicate that about 24 stages will be
required in the extraction column in order to obtain
adequate rare-earth removal times with bismuth flow
rates of 15 gallons per minute and process cycle times of 30 days. The optimum feed point location is near the top of the column for rare-earth—thorium separation factors below 1.3 and is shifted downward as the separation
factor is increased.

Operation of the reductive extraction system for
rare-earth removal requires that only a negligible quantity of Thorium tetrafluoride remain in the salt which passes through
the electrolytic cell and returns to the bottom of the
extraction column. Calculations indicate that removal
of Thorium tetrafluoride from the salt can be effected by countercurrent contact of the salt with a lithium-bismuth stream
having a lithium concentration of 0.008 mole fraction
at a metal-tosalt molar flow ratio of 74.6. Two to three
theoretical stages will be required to maintain the
desired extent of Thorium tetrafluoride removal.

Natural convection heat transfer coefficients, heat
fluxes, and the thickness of the frozen salt insulating
film were calculated for a hypothetical electrolytic cell
geometry. The calculations showed that the heat fluxes
required to maintain the frozen salt insulators intact
were reasonable, although high, and that a low-melting-point cell coolant such as sodium or Sodium potassium would be
required. Other calculations showed that the heat
transfer properties of water and mercury were similar to salt and bismuth. Hence the water-mercury system molten salt breeder reactor flowsheet. It was found that while axial mixing
is unimportant in the protactinium isolation columns, it
results in impractical column lengths in the rare-earth
removal system, which operates at a high metal-to-salt
flow ratio. Calculations also indicated that axial mixing
equivalent to backflow of 25 percent of the salt throughout would result in an increase in required column length of
only 25 percent. Development of backflow preventers with would be useful for mockup purposes.
