This document summarizes the large program of chemical research and development which led to selection of fuel and coolant compositions for the Molten-Salt Reactor Experiment (MSRE) and for subsequent reactors of this type. Chemical behavior of the LiF-BeF,ZvF,UF, fuel mixture and behavior of fission products during power operation of MSRE are presented. A discussion of the chemical reactions which show promise for recovery of bred Pa and for removal of fission product poisons from a molten-salt breeder reactor is included. A single-fluid molten-salt thermal breeder (MSBR) of the type described by Rosenthal Bettis and Robertson and Perry and Bauman makes very stringent demands upon its fluid fuel. This fuel must consist of elements having low capture cross sections for neutrons typical of the energy spectrum of the chosen design. The fuel must dissolve more than the critical concentration of fissionable material and high concentrations of fertile material  at temperatures safely below the temperature at which the salt leaves the MSBR heat exchanger. The mixture must be thermally stable, and its vapor pressure needs to be low over an operating temperature range (1100 to 1400 F) sufficiently high to permit generation of high quality steam for power production. The fuel mixture must possess heat transfer and hydrodynamic properties adequate for its service as a heat-exchange fluid. It must be relatively non aggressive toward some otherwise suitable material of construction and toward some suitable moderator material. The fuel must be stable toward reactor radiation, must be able to survive fission of the uranium (or other fissionable material) and must tolerate fission product accumulation without serious deterioration of its useful properties. We must also be assured of a genuinely low fuel-cycle cost this presupposes a low-cost fuel associated with inexpensive turnaround of the unburned fissile material, and effective and economical schemes for recovery of bred fissile material and for removal of fission product poisons from the fuel.

A suitable secondary coolant must be provided to link the fuel circuit with the steam-generating equipment. The demands imposed upon this coolant fluid differ in obvious ways from those imposed upon the fuel system. Radiation intensities will be markedly less in the coolant system, and the consequences of uranium fission will be absent. The coolant salt must, however, be compatible with metals of construction which will handle the fuel and the steam it must not undergo violent reactions with fuel or steam should leaks develop in either circuit. The coolant should be inexpensive, possessed of good heat-transfer properties, and it should melt at temperatures suitable for steam cycle start-up. An ideal coolant would consist of compounds which would be easy to separate from the valuable fuel mixture should they mix as a consequence of a leak.

This report presents, in brief, the basis for choice of fuel and coolant systems which seem optimum in light of these numerous and to some extent conflicting requirements.

Compounds which are permissible major constituents of fuels for single-fluid thermal breeders are those which can be prepared from beryllium, bismuth, boron-11, carbon, deuterium, fluorine, lithium-7, nitrogen-15, oxygen, and the fissionable and fertile materials. As minor constituents one might tolerate compounds containing the other elements.

Many chemical compounds can be prepared from the several major constituents listed above, Most of these, however, can be eliminated after elementary consideration of the fuel requirements. No hydrogen (or deuterium) bearing compounds possess overall properties that are practical in such melts. Carbon, nitrogen, and oxygen form high melting binary compounds with the fissionable and fertile metals these compounds are quite unsuitable as constituents of liquid systems. The oxygenated anions either lack the required thermal stability (i.e. NO ) or fail as solvents for high concentrations of thorium compounds (like CO). It quickly develops, therefore, that fluorides are the only suitable salts indicated in this list of elements.

Fluoride ion is capable of appreciable neutron moderation, but this moderation is by itself insufficient for good neutron thermalization. An additional moderator is, accordingly, required.

The only good moderator material truly compatible with molten-fluoride fuel mixtures is graphite. Phase Behavior Among Fluorides

Uranium tetrafluoride and uranium trifluoride are the only fluorides (or oxyfluorides) of uranium which appear useful as constituents of moltenfluoride fuels. Uranium tetrafluoride (UF,) is relatively stable, nonvolatile, and largely nonhygroscopic. It melts at 1035 C (1895 F), but this freezing point is markedly depressed by useful diluent fluorides. It is unstable at lower temperatures in most molten-fluoride solutions and is tolerable in reactor fuels only with a large excess of UF4 so that the activity of U is so low as to avoid appreciable reaction with moderator graphite or container metal. 

Thorium tetrafluoride (ThF4) is the only known fluoride of thorium. It melts at 1111 C (2032 F) but fortunately its freezing point is markedly depressed by fluoride diluents which are also useful with UF4.

Consideration of nuclear properties alone leads one to prefer as diluents the fluorides of Be, Bi, Li, Mg, Pb, and Zr in that order. Equally simple consideration of the stability of these fluorides toward reduction by structural metals, however, eliminates the bismuth fluorides from consideration. This leaves BeF:and LiF as the preferred diluent fluorides. Phase behavior of systems based upon LiF and BeF:as the major constituents, has, accordingly, been examined in detail. Fortunately for the molten fluoride reactor concept, the phase diagrams of LiF-BeF.-UF, and LiF-BeF:-ThF4 are such as to make these materials useful as fuels.

The binary system LiF-BeF: has melting points below 500 C over the concentration range from 33 to 80 mole BeF. The phase diagram, presented in , is characterized by a single eutectic (52 mole % BeF:, melting at 360 C) between BeF, and 2LiF-BeF:. The compound 2LiF-BeF, melts incongruently to LiF and liquid at 458 C. LiF-BeF is formed by the reaction of solid BeF and solid 2LiF-BeF below 280 C.

The phase behavior of the BeF-UF and BeF systems are very similar. Both systems show simple single eutectics containing very small concentrations of the heavy metal fluoride. ThF4 and UF4 are isostructural they form a continuous series of solid solutions with neither maximum nor minimum.

The binary diagrams LiF-UF and LiF-ThF, are generally similar and much more complex than the binary diagrams discussed immediately above. The LiF-UF, system shows three compounds (none are congruently melting) and a single eutectic, at 27 mole % UF4, melting at 490 C. The LiF-ThF4 system contains four binary compounds, one of which (3LiF-ThF4) melts congruently, with two eutectics at 570 C and 22 moles ThF, and at 560 C and 29 mole ThFy.

The ternary system LiF-ThF4-UF,, shown in shows no ternary compounds and a single eutectic freezing at 488 C with 1.5 mole % ThF, and 26.5 mole % UF,. Most of the area on the diagram is occupied by the primary phase fields of the solid solutions UF4-ThF, LiF-4UF4-LiF-4ThF, and LiF-UF,-LiF-ThF.

The single-fluid molten-salt breeder fuel will need a concentration of ThFs much higher than that of UF4. Accordingly, the phase behavior of the fuel will be dictated by that of the LiF-BeF2ThF, system. Figure 3 gives the ternary system LiF-BeF.-ThF,, this system shows a single ternary eutectic at 47 mole% LiF and 1.5 mole % ThF, melting at 360 C. The system is complicated to some extent by the fact that the compound 3LiFThF, can incorporate Be ions in both interstitial and substitutional sites to form solid solutions whose compositional extremes are represented by the shaded triangular region near that compound. Liquid temperatures less than 550 C (1020 F) are available at ThF, concentrations as high as 22 mole%. The maximum ThF4 concentration available at liquid temperatures of 500 C (932 F) is seen to be just above 14 mole % . Inspection of the diagram reveals that a considerable range of compositions with > 10 mole % ThF,4 will be completely molten at or below 500 C.

As expected from the general similarity of ThF, and UF and especially from the substitutional behavior shown by the LiF-UF4-ThF4 system substitution of a small quantity of UF for ThF. scarcely changes the phase behavior. Accordingly, and to a very good approximation, represents the behavior of the LiF-BeF,-ThF4-UF4 system over concentration regions such that the mole fraction of ThF, is much greater than that of UF4.

When a melt containing only LiF, BeF, and UF4 is treated with a reactive oxide (such as H, 0O) precipitation of transparent ruby crystals of UO2, 00 results. If the melt contains, in addition, an appreciable concentration of ZrF, the situation is markedly altered. ZrO is less soluble than is UO: in such melts, and the monoclinic ZrO: (the form stable below 1125 C) includes very little UO: in solid solution. Thus, inadvertent oxide contamination of a LiF-BeF-ZrFs-UF, melt yields monoclinic ZrO. containing 250 ppm of UO:. Precipitation of cubic UO. (containing a small concentration of ZrO.) begins only after precipitation of ZrO, had dropped the ZrF, concentration to near that of the UF.

Slow precipitation of UO. followed by a sudden entrance of this material into the reactor core could result in undesired increased in reactivity. This possibility was assumed to represent a danger to the Molten-Salt Reactor Experiment. Accordingly, the MSRE fuel was chosen to contain 5 Mole % of ZrF, to eliminate such a possibility.

When a mixture of LiF and BeF, containing ThF, and UF4 is treated with a reactive oxide a homogeneous cubic phase is produced this phase is a solid solution of UO and Th. which is very rich in UO. increase with UO concentration of the oxide phase and decrease markedly with temperature. Since values for mixtures similar to those chosen as fuel compositions are typically 300 to 1000, it is clear that oxide contamination of such salts will selectively precipitate the uranium.

It is likely, though not certain, that addition of some ZrF, would afford protection of the sort obtained with the MSRE fuel. Such addition is undesirable, however, since the presence of ZrF, would certainly complicate the separation processes described later in this paper and elsewhere in this series.

The successful operation of the MSRE over a three year period (discussed later) lends confidence that oxide contamination of the fuel system can be kept to adequately low levels. This confidence, when added to the prospect that the breeder fuel will be reprocessed (and its oxide level reduced) at regular intervals, suggests very strongly that successful operation can be achieved without added oxide protection.

Tolerance levels for oxide concentration in LiF-BeF.UF4 and LiF-BeF-ZrF,-UF, systems have been studied in detail and are relatively well understood. Analogous values for the LiFBeF,-ThF4-UF, system are still largely lacking. It is known, however, that processing of these quaternary melts with anhydrous HF and H: serves to remove oxide to a level below that required for precipitation of the solid solutions. There seems little doubt, therefore, that initial processing of the type used for MSRE fuels can be successfully applied on a large scale to the LiF-BeF-ThF4UF4 system.

The fuel chosen for operation of MSRE isotopic mixture containing 33% of the fissionable isotope was a mixture of LiF, BeF, ZrFs, and UF, consisting of 65, 29.1, 5, and 0.9 moles, respectively. The uranium concentration was fixed at 1% so that there was less possibility of fissile U precipitating. U was necessary to achieve criticality and to provide a small excess of fissionable material for power operation of the machine. The ZrF4 was added, as indicated above, to preclude possible inadvertent precipitation of UO. Beryllium fluoride is an extremely viscous material its viscosity is markedly lowered by addition of LiF. The ratio of LiF to BeF in the MSRE fuel was chosen to optimize the conflicting demands for low viscosity and a low liquid temperature for the molten fuel.

The single-fluid breeder requires a high concentration of ThF4 concentrations near 12 moles seem to be reasonable for good reactor performance. Criticality estimates suggest that such a fuel could be made critical in a practicable reactor with somewhat < 0.3 mole% 2UF,. The ratio of LiF to BeF, should, to decrease viscosity, be kept at a value as high as is practicable. If the liquids temperature is to be kept at or below 500 C (932 F) for a melt with 12 mole % of ThF4, the beryllium concentration limits range from 16 to 25 mole %. The most likely choice for the MSBR fuel and the present design composition is, accordingly, LiF-BeF,-ThF.-UF, at 71.7-16-12-0.3 moles, respectively.

The secondary coolant is required to remove heat from the fuel in the primary heat exchanger and to transport this heat to the power generating system. In the MSBR the coolant must transport heat to supercritical steam at minimum temperatures only modestly above 700 F. In the MSRE the heat was rejected to an air cooled radiator at markedly higher salt temperatures.

The coolant mixture chosen for the MSRE and shown to be satisfactory in that application is BeF: with 66 moles of LiF. Use of this mixture would pose some difficulties in design of equipment for the MSBR since its liquid temperature is 851 F moreover, it is an expensive material. The eutectic mixture of LiF with BeF, (48 moles LiF) melts at near 700 F but it is relatively viscous and is expensive, especially if LiF is used.

The alkali metals, excellent coolants with real promise in other systems, are undesirable here since they react vigorously with both fuel and steam. Less noble metal coolants such as Pb or Bi undergo no violent reactions, but they are not compatible with Hastelloy-N, the Ni-based alloy used in MSRE and intended for use in MSBRs.

Several binary chloride systems are known to have eutectics melting below (in some cases much below) 700 F. These binary systems do not, however, appear especially attractive since they contain high concentrations of chlorides (TICI, ZnClz, BiCl, CdCl, or SnCl, which are easily reduced and, accordingly, corrosive or chlorides AlCls, ZrCl, HICls, or BeCly, which are very volatile. The only low-melting binary systems of stable, non-volatile chlorides are those containing LiCl LiCl-CsCl (330 C at 45 moles CsCl), LiClKCl (355 C at 42 mole KCl), LiCl-RbCl (312 C at 45 mole% RbCl). Such systems would be relatively expensive if made from LiCl, and they could lead to serious contamination of the fuel if normal LiCl were used.

Very few fluorides or mixtures of fluorides are known to melt at temperatures below 370 C. Stannous fluoride (SnF) melts at 212 C. This material is probably not stable during long term service in Hastelloy-N moreover, its phase diagrams with stable fluorides (such as NaF or LiF) show high melting points at relatively low alkali fluoride concentrations. Coolant compositions which will meet the low liquid temperature specification may be chosen from the NaF-BeF, or NaF-LiF-BeF, system. These materials are almost certainly compatible with Hastelloy-N, and they possess adequate specific heats and low vapor pressures (discussed in the next section). They (especially those including LiF) are moderately expensive, and their viscosities at low temperature are certainly higher than desirable. It is possible that substitution of ZrF, or even AlF for some of the BeF. would provide liquids of lower viscosity at no real expense in liquid temperature.

It now appears that the best choice for the MSBR secondary coolant is the eutectic mixture of sodium fluoride and sodium fluoroborate. The binary system NaF-NaBF, has been described as showing a eutectic at 60 mole NaBF, melting at 304 C (580 F). Studies here have shown that this publication is seriously in error. Boric oxide substantially lowers the freezing point of NaFNaBF mixtures the original authors may well have used quite impure materials. Use of pure NaF and NaBF, leads to the conclusion that the system shows a single eutectic at 8 mole % NaF and a melting point of 385 C (725 F).

At elevated temperatures the fluoroborates show an appreciable equilibrium pressure of gaseous BFs.

The densities were calculated from the molar volumes of the pure components by assuming the volumes to be additive. The heat capacities were estimated by assuming that each gram atom in the mixture contributes 8 calories per degree centigrade. The value of 8 is the approximate average from a set of similar fluoride melts. The viscosity of the MSBR fuel and the BeF based coolants were estimated from other measured LiF-BeF: and NaF-BeF: mixtures.

The vapor pressure of the fuels and the BeF based coolants are considered negligible extrapolation of measurements from similar mixtures yielded pressures < 0.1 mm. The partial pressure of BFs above the fluoroborate coolant mixture was calculated from measurements on very similar mixtures.

Details and specific findings of the large program of corrosion testing are presented by McCoy et a1 as a separate article in this issue. In brief, compatibility of the MSBR materials is assured by choosing as melt constituents only fluorides that, insofar as is possible, are thermodynamically stable toward the moderator graphite and toward the structural metal, Hastelloy-N a nickel alloy containing  12% Mo, 7% Cr, 4% Fe, 1% Ti, and small amounts of other elements. The major fuel components (LiF, BeF2, UF4, and ThF4) are much more stable than the structural metal fluorides (NiF2z, FeF3z, and CrF2) accordingly, the fuel and blanket have a minimal tendency to corrode the metal. Such selection, combined with proper purification procedures, provides liquids whose corrosivity is well within tolerable limits. The chemical properties of the materials and the nature of their several interactions are described briefly in the following.

aHastelloy-N used in MSRE was Ni with 17% Mo, 7% Cr, 59 Fe. Probable composition of modified Hastelloy-N for MSBE is that shown above.

A continuing program of experimentation over many years has been devoted to definition of the thermodynamic properties of many species in molten LiF-BeF: solutions. Many techniques have been used in this study. From these data one can assess the extent to which UFs-bearing melt will disproportionate according to the reaction

For the case where the total uranium in the molten solution of 0.9 mole% (as in the MSRE) the activity of metallic uranium is near 10 with 1% of the UF, converted to UFs and is near 2 X 10^7 with 20% of the UF4 so converted. Operation of the reactor with a small fraction (usually <2%) of the uranium present as UFs is advantageous insofar as corrosion and the consequences of fission are concerned . Such operation with some UFs present should result in formation of an extremely dilute (and experimentally undetectable) alloy of uranium with the surface of the container metal. Operation with > 50% of the uranium as UFs would lead to much more concentrated (and highly deleterious) alloying and to formation of uranium carbides. Fortunately, all evidence to date demonstrates that operation with relatively little UFs is completely satisfactory.

The reaction of UF4 with Cr, on the other hand, has an equilibrium constant with a small temperature dependence hence, when the salt is forced to circulate through a temperature gradient, a possible mechanism exists for mass transfer and continued attack.

If nickel, iron, and molybdenum are assumed to be completely inert diluents for chromium (as is approximately true), and if the circulation rate in the MSBR is very rapid, the corrosion process can be simply described. At high flow rates, uniform concentrations of UFs and CrF. are maintained throughout the fluid circuit these concentrations satisfy (at some intermediate temperature) the equilibrium constant for the reaction. Under these steady-state conditions, there exists some temperature (intermediate between the maximum and minimum temperatures of the circuit) at which the initial surface composition of the structural metal is at equilibrium with the fused salt. Since the equilibrium constant for the chemical reaction increases with increasing temperature, the chromium concentration in the alloy surface tends to decrease at temperatures higher than T and tends to increase at temperatures lower than 7. [In some melts (NaF-LiF-KF-UF4, for example) AG for the mass transfer reaction is quite large, and the equilibrium constant changes sufficiently as a function of temperature to cause formation of dendritic chromium crystals in the cold zone.] For MSBR fuel and other LiF-BeF2-UF4 mixtures, the temperature dependence of the mass-transfer reaction is small, and the equilibrium is satisfied at reactor temperature conditions without the formation of crystalline chromium. Thus, in the MSBR, the rate of chromium removal from the salt stream by deposition at cold-fluid regions is controlled by the slow rate at which chromium diffuses into the cold-fluid wall the chromium concentration gradient tends to be small, and the resulting corrosion is well within tolerable limits. Titanium, which must be presumed to undergo similar reactions, diffuses less readily than does Cr in Hastelloy-N. It seems most unlikely that the 1% of Ti in the alloy will prove detrimental.

The results of numerous long-term tests have shown that Hastelloy-N has excellent corrosion resistance to molten-fluoride mixtures at temperatures well above those anticipated in MSBR. The attack from mixtures similar to the MSBR fuel at hot-zone temperatures as high as 1300 F is barely observable in tests of as long as 12,000 hours. A figure of < 0.5 mil/year is expected. In MSRE, attack was 0.1 mil/year. Thus, corrosion of the container metal by the reactor fuel does not seem to be an important problem in the MSBR.

Graphite does not react with molten fluoride mixtures of the type to be used in the MSBR. Available thermodynamic data suggest that the most likely reaction should come to equilibrium at CF4 pressures 10% atm. CF4 concentrations over graphite-salt systems maintained for long periods at elevated temperatures have been shown to be below the limit of detection (< 1 ppm) of this compound by mass spectrometry. Moreover, graphite has been used as a container material for many NaF-ZrF,UF. LiF-BeF:-UF4, and other salt mixtures with no evidence of chemical instability.

The Molten-Salt Reactor Experiment was, as detailed in an article by Haubenreich and Engel operated during much of 1966, 1967, and early 1968 with the original fuel charge in which the uranium was 33% U with the balance consisting primarily of U. The reactor accumulated nearly 70,000 MWh of operation during this interval with the major fraction of this accumulated at the maximum power of 8 MW(th).

Behavior of Fuel Components Samples of the molten salts were removed routinely from the fuel and coolant circuits and were analyzed for uranium, major fuel constituents, possible corrosion products, and (less frequently) for oxide ion contamination. Early in the power runs, standard samples of fuel were drawn three times per week this schedule was markedly diminished as confidence in the system grew. At late stages in the power runs, analyses for these items was generally done on a one-per-week basis. The LiF-BeF: coolant system was sampled every two weeks initially and less frequently during 1967 and 1968.

Chemical determinations of uranium content of the fuel salt were run by coulometric titrations of dilute aqueous solutions. Such analyses showed good reproducibility and high precision (+0.5%). (On-site reactivity balance calculations proved to be about ten-fold more sensitive than this in establishing changes in uranium concentrations within the fuel circuit.) Agreement of the chemically determined uranium concentrations (in a statistical sense) with the reactor inventory values diminished by the uranium burn up during operation was excellent. The inventory value at end of operation on U showed the uranium concentration to be 4.532% by weight. The difference (200 g of uranium out of 220 kg) is <0.1%. These data strongly indicate that uranium losses (as to the purge gas stream) have been extremely small and that, as anticipated, the fuel salt is chemically stable during long periods of reactor operation. A further check on these numbers will be possible when the U mixture removed by fluorination from the MSRE fuel is recovered and assayed.

While analyses for UFs and for ZrF, agree quite well with the inventory data, the values for LiF and BeF: have never done so analyses for LiF have shown higher and those for BeF, have shown lower values than the inventory since start-up. 

discrepancy in LiF and BeF: concentration remains a puzzle, but there was nothing in the analyses (or in the behavior of the reactor) to suggest that any changes occurred.

Oxide concentration in the radioactive fuel salt were performed by careful evaluation of H: O produced upon treatment of the salt samples with anhydrous gaseous HF. All samples examined showed less than 100 ppm of O% no perceptible increase in the values with time or with operational details was apparent. These facts are quite reassuring insofar as maintaining oxide contamination at very low levels in future reactor systems is concerned.

MSRE maintenance operations have necessitated flushing the interior of the drained reactor circuit on numerous occasions. The salt used for this operation consisted originally of a LiF-BeF, (66.0 to 34.0 mole%) mixture. Analysis of this salt before and after each use shows that 215 ppm of uranium is added to the flush salt in each flushing operation this corresponds to removal of 22.7 kg of fuel-salt residue (0.5% of the charge) from the reactor circuit.

Behavior of Corrosion Products Analysis of many samples at regular intervals during reactor operation showed relatively high values for iron (120 ppm) and nickel (50 ppm) in the salt. These values scattered significantly but showed no perceptible trends. They do not seem to represent dissolved Fe or Ni. Molybdenum concentrations were shown, in the few attempts made, to be below the detectable limit ( 25 ppm) for chemical analysis.

The chromium concentration, as determined by chemical analysis, rose from an initial value near 40 ppm to a final value after 70,000 MWh of 85 ppm. A considerable scatter (+ 15 ppm) in the numbers was apparent but the increase with time and reactor operation is clearly real. All evidence suggests that the analytically determined chromium was largely, if not entirely, present as dissolved Cr. This observed increase in chromium concentration corresponds to removal of <250 g of this element from the MSRE circuit. If this were removed uniformly it would deplete the chromium in the alloy to a depth of < 0.2 mil. Such an estimate of corrosion seems consistent with observations (reported elsewhere in this series) showing very slight attack by the fuel during MSRE operation.

This virtual absence of corrosion though in general accord with results from a variety of engineering corrosion tests is mildly surprising since the MSRE was operated for appreciable periods with the fuel salt more oxidizing than necessary. The analysis for ratio of Ut to U has proved especially difficult in the radioactive salts, but it seems certain that the MSRE fuel has, at times, contained < 0.2% of the total uranium as

The fission process (see following section of this report) appears to be mildly oxidizing toward dissolved U in the fuel. Accordingly, and although the corrosion product analysis did not seem to require it, a convenient means was developed for adding UY to the reactor circuit as desired. Beryllium metal (as 3-in. rods of 3-in. diameter encased in a perforated capsule of nickel) was introduced through the sampling system and suspended in the flowing salt stream in the MSRE pump bowl. This active metal reacts with UF4 by Be + 2UF4 = BeF+ 2UF3 (16) at a rate such that some 600 g of UFs is produced during an 8-h treatment. The salt flowing past the Be appears to be locally over-reduced so that at least 6% of the UF4 becomes UF js crystalline Cr was observed upon the nickel capsule from one such reduction attempt. The over-reduced salt mixture clearly reacted and achieved equilibrium with the large excess of unreduced salt in the pump bowl and reactor circuit.

A molten-salt reactor which included a reprocessing circuit could use that external circuit to maintain the UF, UFs ratio at the desired level. Use of techniques such as the Be addition for such a reactor would seem to be quite feasible but unnecessary.

When fission of UF4 occurs in a well-mixed high-temperature molten-fluoride, four fluoride ions associated with the U are released and the two fission fragments must come quickly to a steady state as common chemical entities. This steady state is made very complicated by the radioactive decay of many species. The valence states that the fission product assume in the molten system are, presumably, defined by the requirements that cation-anion equivalence be maintained in the liquid and redox equilibria be established both among the components of the melt and the surface layers of the container metal. Fluorine and uranium species higher than 4 are, in MSRE and MSBR fuels, unstable toward reduction by the active constituents of Hastelloy-N the fission product cations must satisfy the four fluoride ions plus the fission product anions. Should they prove inadequate, or if they become adequate only by assuming oxidation states incompatible with Hastelloy-N, then oxidation of UFs must occur or the container must supply the deficiency. Operation of MSRE has indicated that the presence of UF in relatively low concentrations (see preceding sections) suffices to avoid oxidation or corrosion from this source. Behavior of the fission products in MSRE was studied during the entire period of operation with 23 U. Samples of MSRE fuel, drawn from the sampling station in the MSRE pump bowl, have been routinely analyzed for numerous fission product species. Since samples drawn in open metal cups were shown to give erroneously high values for gas-borne species, evacuated bulbs of Ni sealed with a fusible plug of salt were used to obtain many of the data presented here.

Samples of the helium gas purge within the MSRE were obtained by use of identical evacuated sample bulbs in which the fusible plug was permitted to melt with the bulb exposed to the gas phase.

In addition to these salt and gas samples, assemblies of surveillance specimens were exposed as the central stringer within the MSRE core. These assemblies included specimens of various graphites and many specimens of Hastelloy-N and some other metals. Their removal at reactor shutdowns permitted study of fission product depositions after 8000, 20,000, and 70,000 MWh of operation.

Samples of salt removed from the pump bowl were dissolved in analytical chemistry hot cells (after careful leaching of activities from the outside of capsules where necessary) the fission products were identified and their quantity determined radiochemically. Analysis of the gas samples was accomplished similarly after careful leaching of the activities from within the capsules. Deposition of fission products upon the metallic surveillance specimens was determined in the same way after repeated leachings of the metal surface.

Deposition on the graphite specimens was established as a function of depth of penetration. This was accomplished by careful milling of successive thin layers from each surface of the rectangular specimens. The removed layers were separately recovered and analyzed for several fission product isotopes.

The fission gasses Kr and Xe form no compounds under conditions existing in a molten-salt reactor and these elements are only very sparingly soluble in the molten fluoride. The helium purge gas introduced into the MSRE pump bowl serves to strip these gasses from the incoming salt to charcoal filled traps downstream in the exit gas system. This stripping ensures that the fission product daughters of these gasses will appear within the reactor system at lower than the theoretical concentration. The MSRE graphite is, of course, permeable to Kr and Xe radioactive daughters of these gasses are, accordingly, expected in the graphite specimens.

The fission products Rb, Cs, Sr, Ba, the lanthanides and yttrium, and Zr all form quite stable and well-known fluorides which are soluble in MSRE fuel. These fission products were expected (except to the extent that volatile precursor Kr and Xe had escaped) to be found almost completely in the molten fuel. These expectations have been confirmed. Isotopes such as Zr, Sr, and Cewhich have no precursors of consequence are typically found in the salt at 90%% of the calculated quantity. Isotopes such as Sr and Ba whose Kr and Xe precursors have appreciable half-lives are found in less than the calculated quantity these isotopes are, as expected, found in the graphite specimens and the gas samples as well.

The elements (molybdenum, niobium, ruthenium, and tellurium) whose higher valence fluorides are volatile and relatively unstable toward reduction by UF are virtually absent from the salt. Typical analyses of samples (which have been carefully protected from the pump bowl gas by use of the evacuated bulb samples) show < 2% of the calculated concentration of these isotopes.

Deposition of fission products on the around 7 to 10-mil outer layers of graphite specimens exposed for 8000 MWh in MSRE. It is clear that, with the assumption of uniform deposition in or on the moderator graphite, appreciable fractions of Mo, Te, and Ru and a larger fraction of the Nb are associated with the graphite. Subsequent examinations of graphite after 22000 and 70000 MWh have shown somewhat smaller fractions deposited for all these isotopes.

A careful determination of uranium in or on the graphite specimens led to values < 1 pug/cm. This quantity of uranium equivalent to a few grams in the moderator stack seems completely negligible.

Isotopes (such as Ba) which penetrated the graphite as noble gasses show straight lines on the logarithmic plot they seem to have remained at the point where the noble gas decayed As expected, the gradient for Ba with 16- sec Xe precursor is much steeper than that for Sr, which has a 3.2-min Kr precursor. All the others shown show a much steeper concentration dependence. 

Examination of the Hastelloy-N surveillance specimens exposed in the MSRE core reveals very low concentrations of the stable fluoride-forming fission products. The more noble metals such as Mo, Nb, and Ru are deposited, along with Te, in appreciable though not in large quantities. If the surveillance specimens are truly representative of all the metal surface in MSRE then only a relatively small fraction of these metals are so deposited. However, flow conditions in the MSRE heat exchanger (where most of the metal surface exists) is turbulent while laminar flow occurs over the core specimens. It seems very likely that the actual fraction deposited on MSRE metal is higher than that shown here.

 A small quantity of Zr appears in the gas phase this isotope, along with several others with stable soluble fluorides, almost certainly appears in the gas as fine particles of salt mist. However, high concentrations of Mo, and Ru are found in the gas phase. Indeed, the gas samples represent the largest fractions observed for each of these isotopes. In addition, appreciable fractions of Ag and of palladium isotopes have been observed in the purge gas samples. An appreciable quantity of appears in the gas phase it seems very likely that its appearance there is due to its tellurium precursor.

The mechanisms by which the Mo, Nb, Te, and Ru isotopes appear in the gas phase are still not fully understood. NbFs, MoFs, RuFs, and TeFq are all volatile (although Ag and Pd have no volatile fluorides) these volatile fluorides, however, are far too unstable, with the possible exception of NbFs, to exist at the redox potentials in MSRE. Stability of lower fluorides of these elements is poorly known it is possible that some of these may contribute to the volatility.

It seems much more likely, however, that all these species exist in the reduced MSRE fuel in elemental form. They originate as (or very rapidly become) individual metal atoms. They aggregate in the fuel at some slow but finite rate, and become insoluble as very minute colloidal particles which then grow at a slower rate. These colloidal particles are not wetted by the fuel, they tend to collect as gas-liquid interfaces, and they can readily be swept into the gas stream of the helium purge of the pump bowl. They tend to plate upon the metal surfaces of the system, and (as extraordinarily fine smoke to penetrate the outer layers of the moderator. While there are difficulties with this interpretation it seems more plausible than others suggested to date.

Deposition of fission products on or in the graphite is, of course, undesirable since there they serve most efficiently as nuclear poisons. Of the species studied only Nb (whose carbide is stable at MSRE temperatures) seems to prefer the graphite.

It seems likely that in a MSBR the molten fuel will contain virtually all of the zirconium, the lanthanides and yttrium produced, and a large fraction of the iodine, rubidium, cesium, strontium, and barium. These species would, therefore, be available for removal in the processing plant. The salt will contain very little Mo, Nb, Te, Ru, and (presumably) technetium. These will report to the MSBR metal, graphite, and purge gas systems in fractions which are probably not very different from those indicated for MSRE.

Molten-salt breeder reactors will require effective schemes for recovery of the fissionable material which is produced and for removal of fission product poisons from the fuel. MSRE produced no significant quantity of fissionable isotope and made no provision for on-stream removal of fission products other than the noble gasses Kr and Xe.

Recovery of uranium from molten fluorides by volatilization as UFs and the subsequent decontamination of this UFe by sorption-desorption on beds of NaF is well demonstrated. Recovery of uranium from MSRE or MSBR fuel by this scheme is clearly feasible. However, performance of a single-fluid MSBR is markedly improved if the bred protactinium is removed from the circulating fuel and permitted to decay to 2U outside the reactor core. Fluorination is not effective in removal of protactinium from molten fluoride mixtures. Development of other processes for Pa recovery has, accordingly, been necessary.

In molten-salt reactors, from which Kr and Xe are effectively removed, the most important fission product poisons are among the lanthanides. These fission products, as indicated above, form stable fluorides which are soluble in the fuel and will report almost quantitatively with the fuel to the separations plant. Their removal especially from fuels with high ThFs concentrations is difficult. Rare earths have, accordingly, received more attention than other fission products.

Protactinium is produced in the MSBR fuel by reaction of a neutron with Th to yield 2Th which transmutes to Pa the Pa decays with a 27.4-day half-life to U. Clearly, a separation of Pa from the fuel needs, if it is to be effective, to be accomplished on a cycle time short compared with this half-life. It is desirable to process the fuel on a cycle of three to five days. The process needs, therefore, to be relatively simple.

Removal of Pa from LiF-BeF-ThF, mixtures by addition of BeO, ThO., or even UO: has been demonstrated in laboratory-scale experiments Addition of these oxides to MSBR fuel composition would, as indicated in a previous section of this report, result in a uranium-oxide-rich solid solution of UOz-ThO2. Whether the protactinium oxide

was adsorbed on the added oxide or participated in the solid solution formation is not known. The process was shown to be reversible treatment of the oxide-fluoride system with anhydrous HF dissolves the oxide and returns the Pa to the fluoride melt from which it can readily be reprecipitated. It seems likely that Pa might be removed from the MSBR fuel by effective contact of a fuel mixture side stream with UO-ThO, solid solution. Such a possibility which is still under consideration in laboratory-scale equipment would add appreciably to the U inventory through holdup of UO: in the solid solution. It would also probably require that the oxide ion concentration in the fuel after contact be diminished (as by treatment with HF) before the melt could be returned to the reactor.

Separations based upon reduction of the Pa (present in the fuel as PaF, to metal and extraction into liquid metals appears at present to be more attractive. Such separations have the following basis.

When thorium metal, dissolved as a dilute alloy in bismuth (Thg), is equilibrated with a molten mixture of LiF, BeF, and ThF, several equilibria must be satisfied simultaneously. 

Accordingly, if a melt containing both UFs and PaF,4 is contacted with bismuth and thorium metal added in small increments the uranium and the protactinium are extracted.

Preliminary experiments disclosed that Pa could indeed be removed from the salts by reduction with Th but material balance data were very poor and little Pa appeared in the Bi. More recent experiments have used equipment of molybdenum, which seems essentially inert to the salt and the alloy, and very careful purification of the materials and the cover gas. By these techniques two sets of investigators have shown values in excess of 1500 for the separation factor where N indicates mole fraction of the indicated species either in metal or in LiF-BeF2:-ThF4 solution. The separation factor for U from Pa has been shown to be above 25. These separation factors are, of course, quite adequate for process design.

There is no real doubt that the rare-earth elements, which form fluorides that are more stable than ThF. will be present in MSBR fuel sent to the processing plant.

The limited solubility of these trifluorides (though sufficient to prevent their precipitation under normal MSBR conditions) has suggested a possible recovery scheme. When a LiF-BeF:ThF,-UF. melt (in the MSBR concentration range) that is saturated with a single rare-earth fluoride (LaFs, for example) is cooled slowly, the precipitate is the pure simple trifluoride. When the melt contains more than one rare-earth fluoride the precipitate is a (nearly ideal) solid solution of the trifluorides. Accordingly, addition of an excess of CeFs or LaFs to the melt followed by heating to effect dissolution of the added trifluoride and cooling to effect crystallization effectively removes the fission product rare earths from solution. It is likely that effective removal of the rare earths and yttrium (along with UFs and PuF) could be obtained by passage of the fuel through a heated bed of solid CeFs or LaFs. However, the price is almost certainly too high the resulting fuel solution is saturated with the scavenger fluoride (LaFs or CeFs, whose cross section is far from negligible) at the temperature of contact.

Similar solid solutions are formed by the rare earth trifluorides with UFs. It might, accordingly, be possible to send a side-stream (with the Pa and 2U removed by methods described above) through a bed of UF to remove these fission product poisons 2UF would presumably be used for economic reasons. The resulting LiF-BeF:ThF, solution would be saturated with UFs after its passage through the bed. This U would have to be removed (for example, by electrolytic reduction into molten Bi or Pb) before the salt could be returned to the cycle. The UF bed could be recovered by fluorination to separate the uranium and rare earths. While this process probably deserves further study, the instability of UF in melts with high UFs UF, ratios and the ease with which uranium alloys with most structural metals would tend to make application of such a process unattractive.

Removal of rare-earth ions (and other ionic fission-product species) by use of cation exchangers has always seemed an appealing possibility. The ion exchanger would, of course, need (a) to be quite insoluble, (b) to be extremely unreactive (in a gross sense) with the melt, and (c) to take up rare-earth cations in exchange for ions of low-neutron cross section. The bed of CeF described above functions as an ion ex

Unfortunately, not many materials are truly stable to the LiF-BeF:-ThF4.-UF, fuel mixture. Zirconium oxide is stable (in its low temperature form) to melts whose Zr/U ratio is in excess Of 3, and UO-ThO: solid solutions are stable at equilibrium U/Th ratios. It is conceivable that sufficiently dilute solid solutions of Ce, O in these oxides would be stable and would exchange Ce for other rare earth species. Intermetallic compounds of rare earths with moderately noble metals (or rare earths in very dilute alloys with such metals) seem unlikely to be of use because they are unlikely to be stable toward oxidation by UF4. Compounds with oxygenated anions (such as silicates and molybdates) are decomposed by the fluoride melt they precipitate UO from the fuel mixture. It is possible that refractory compounds (such as carbides or nitrides) of the rare earths, either alone or in solid dilute solution with analogous uranium compounds, may prove useful.

The rare-earth fluorides are very stable toward reduction to the metal. For example, at 1000 K the reaction

However, when the melt is complicated, as is necessary for the single-fluid breeder, by the addition of large quantities of ThF, the situation becomes considerably less favorable. Use of Li concentrations as high as those shown is prohibited. proceeds at lower concentrations than these to yield solid ThBi. Accordingly, the most reducing metallic phase which is tolerable is that represented by the (barely) saturated solution of ThBi, in Bi. When such solutions are used the rare earth fluoride is much less completely extracted and relatively small separation factors from thorium are obtained.

Others in the series show even smaller separation factors. Another paper in this series presents information showing how processes with separation factors of this magnitude could be operated. There is little doubt, however, that improved (larger) separation factors would be desirable there is reason to believe that improvement can be obtained by modification of the alloy phase. Effect of salt composition on the separation of cerium from thorium during reductive extraction of cerium from LiF-BeF,-ThF, mixtures into bismuth at 600 C. Phase behavior of LiF-BeF-ThF4-UFs mixtures appears suitable to permit use of a high concentration of ThFs in melts whose freezing point will prove acceptable for single-fluid molten-salt breeder reactors. Oxide tolerances of such mixtures are not entirely defined, but laboratory experience and the MSRE operating experience combine to suggest that no oxide scavenger (such as ZrF,) need be added. The design basis fuel, accordingly, consists of 71.7 mole LiF, 16 mole BeF, 12 mole ThF4, and 0.3 mole % 2UF. The secondary coolant is to be 8 mole % NaF with 92 mole % NaBF4.  properties of these fluids, estimated in most cases from data on similar materials, seem adequate for their use in MSBR. Compatibility of the LiF-BeF-ThFs-UF4 melt with Hastelloy-N and with moderator graphite seems assured, and operation of LiF-BeF2-ZrF,UF, melts in MSRE indicate very strongly that the compatibility will not be adversely affected by the consequences of radiation and fission of the uranium, Compatibility of the secondary coolant, while less satisfactory, appears to be adequate with Hastelloy-N if salt purity is maintained.

Fission product Kr and Xe are virtually insoluble in the fuel and can be removed, if the moderator graphite is sufficiently impermeable, simple equilibration with an inert gas (helium). Fission products with stable fluorides (Rb, Cs, Sr, Ba, the lanthanides, and Zr) appear almost entirely in the fuel as fluorides except as they are lost through volatilization of precursors. More noble fission products (Nb, Mo, Ru, and Te) are virtually absent from the fuel, but plate (in appreciable amounts) on the graphite and the Hastelloy-N, and appear to a surprisingly large extent in the helium purge gas.

Chemical separations, of which reductive extraction appears most attractive, for removing uranium and protactinium from the fuel salt and from each other have been demonstrated in small scale laboratory equipment. Separations of lanthanides from the fuel are markedly more difficult, but reductive extraction of these elements into molten bismuth appears possible.

While much research and development remains to be accomplished there seems to be no fundamental chemical difficulty with design and operation of a single-fluid molten-salt breeder system.

