This report deals with an exotic paper reactor where the fuel is in the form of molten chlorides.

Fast breeder reactor with a mixed fuel cycle of thorium/ uranium-233 and uranium 258/plutonium in which all of the plutonium can be burned tn 4¢tu and in which a denatured mixture of uranium-233 and uranium-236 is used to supply further reactors. The breeding ratio is relatively high, 1.53 and the specific power is 0.75 GW(th)/m> of fuel.

Fast breeder reactor with two and three zones (internal fertile zone, intermediate fuel zone, external fertile zone) having an extremely high breeding ratio of 1.75 and a specific power of 1.1 GW(th)/m of core.

Extremely high flux reactor for the transmutation of fission products strontium-90 and caesium-137. The efficiency of transmutation is approximately 15 times greater than spontaneous beta decay. This high flux burner reactor is intended as part of a complex breeder/burner system.

(d) Internally cooled fast breeder in which the cooling agent is the molten fertile material, the same as in the blanket zone. This reactor has a moderate breeding ratio of 1.34, a specific power of 9.22 GW(th)/m of core and very good inherent safety properties.

All of these reactors have the fuel in the form of molten chlo- rides: PuCl3 as fissile, UCl; as fertile (if needed) and NaCl as dilutent. The fertile material can be **®UC13 as fertile and NaCl as dilutent. In mixed fuel cycles the ?*

In some special cases, a hypothetical molten fluoride has been considered using PuF3 as the fissile, UF as the fertile and NaF and ZrF4 as the dilutents components. In this case one obtains a lower but still respectable breeding ratio of 1.5.

In all cases, a directly coupled continuously operating reprocessing plant is proposed. Some of the technological problems of reprocessing are discussed. Furthermore, the report touches on some of the difficulties associated with corrosion arising from the use of these molten media coupled with the irradiation effects such as structural damage from fast neutrons.

The thermohydraulic studies show that even under the extreme operating conditions of very high neutron fluxes and high specific power, cooling is possible, in most cases by out-of-core cooling but also in some cases cooling internally in the core.

Some molten salt reactor specific safety problems are discussed. The influence of fast neutrons on the chlorine, forming sulfur by the (n,p) reaction has been experimentally investigated and the results are reported briefly.

The history of the development of fission reactor concepts using molten salt as fuel media is as old and as complex as the history of the development of nuclear power itself. The ups and downs have followed those of the parent technology but the swings have been if anything more violent. In 1975, for example, molten salt technology all but died out, but then in 1977 a new attempt at revival was begun, this time associated with the new interest in proliferation-proof systems.

It is clear that such an arbitrary classification is not necessarily internally compatible, and not all reactor types fall easily into the scheme chosen.

Molten fuel reactors differ from solid-fuel reactors in that they use a liquid fuel instead of a solid one. There are three types of molten fuel reactors: Externally cooled, where the molten fuel is pumped out of the core to the external heat exchanger. In this type of reactor, only fuel and fertile material are present in the core (no coolant). The large amount of molten fuel outside the core does not contribute to the critical mass.

This type of reactor has been discussed, for example, by Nelson (Argonne 1967) and Lane (USA 1970), especially as a high-flux materials testing fast reactor.

In externally cooled fast reactors, the loss of a portion of the delayed neutrons could adversely affect reactor control. Additionally, the biological shielding outside the core is very expensive. Most of the reactors discussed in this paper are externally cooled.

Internally, direct cooled reactors: here the cooling agent is pumped directly into the core where, after mixing, the fuel in the lower part of the core is separated and pumped out of the core to the heat exchanger. The direct contact of molten fuel with molten coolant has several particular advantages very good heat transfer, no coolant tubes (or cladding), possibility of transporting fission products.

The disadvantages are unfortunately numerous: problems with mixing and separating the fuel and coolant, corrosion, etc. This type of reactor has also been studied cooled by molten lead, cooled by boiling mercury and cooled by boiling aluminium chloride. This type of reactor must be considered as an extremely exotic type, and only some references are given here.

internally indirectly cooled reactor: here the cooling agent flows through tubes in the core. Heat is transferred from fuel to coolant across the tubes. No direct contact between molten fuel and liquid or gaseous coolant is permitted. These tynes have also been studied, in most cases using sodium as a coolant, or molten chlorides of uranium.

The aim here is to demonstrate the possibility of using a molten chlorides fast breeder reactor with external cooling as a device for consuming all plutonium produced, in situ. At first the reactor is fuelled with denatured uranium -233/uranium -238 and chis is changed stepwise to a feed of thorium and depleted ar natural uranium only.

The data given indicates that in the given geometry the nominal power and all related values: temperature, temperature gradient, velocity of circulating fuel, heat exchange etc. are as for the steady-state reactor with only plutonium fuel in the core (see

Very shortly after the start-up of the reactor, a significant amount of plutonium has been produced in the core.

The total amount of plutonium chloride, after having been separated from the fission products but mixed with the uranium chloride and sodium chloride, is circulated back into the core. The amount of fresh U-233 required is correspondingly smaller.

The reactor now burns two fissile nuclides, the uranium-233 and the reprocessed plutonium. The data given below refers to the case where approximately half of the fissile uranium-233 is replaced by plutonium-239 and plutonium-241.

Based on relatively simple assumptions concerning the isotopic composition of the plutonium, it can be shown that the same core design is capable of burning a mixture of fissile materials while maintaining approximately the same power level.  These confirm the suitability of the core design for both the build-up phase and the transient phase.

All the newly bred plutonium can be burned in the same reactor (the history of the transplutonium elements is neglected here).

To achieve in situ burning of plutonium, the reprocessing of the irradiated fuel is limited to the separation of all or just the most neutron-absorbing fission products and directly coupled to the reactor. For about 80% of the lifetime of this plant, that is 30 years, the reactor burns its own plutonium and produces the uranium-233 for the next breeder generation.

It should be emphasized that the era when fusion reactors replace other energy sources and hence the plutonium burners are shut down, has not been dealt with.  Even here, it is conceivable that a reactor design could be proposed which only consumes and thus be used in this shutdown phase. However, this has not yet been calculated.

In this section, some intermediate results are presented concerning the influence of selected parameters on this design, and giving the breeding capability of a two-zone fast breeder reactor.

The most important feature of this reactor is the in-situ consumption of plutonium. The studies show this to be feasible. The resulting material balance for the steady state operation is as follows:

The molten chloride fast breeder reactor is ideally suited to the in situ burning of plutonium, meeting the current requirement for a proliferation-safe concept.

This concept has been compared with the more conventional type. Holding most of the parameters the same, the breeding gain comes out about equal. However, one large difference is that although the total power is the same, the specific power changes by more than one magnitude being higher in the central fuel zone reactor.

Since the specific power and intensity of neutron flux is clearly a major problem from the point of view of the engineering design of the reactor (cooling, radiation damage of structural material and fuel), both systems have been studied, that is without a central blanket region and with a radius up to 110 cm. The results are given below for fuel without uranium and with uranium fuel for bath cases: no internal blanket zone and with an internal blanket zone.

The first case is the fast breeder molten salt reactor with uranium-233 as fissile and thorium-232 as fertile material with a three-region layout.

The next step is a study of a mixed fuel cycle in the three-zone fast breeder reactor. This problem has received much attention, and the published papers listed below should be referred to.

For the three zone reactor calculations have also been made for mixed fuel cycles. For fissile materials Pu-239 and U-233, as well as fertile materials with U-238 in the core only and Th-232 in the blanket only.

The thermal flux in all three zones, the external breeding zone, the fuel and the internal breeding zone is only 10% of the total flux and in the external blanket reaches 90% of the total flux. The total flux has a relatively flat distribution and even in the fuel region the max-to-mean ratio is only about

The neutron flux is rather hard and the mean neutron energy calculated as the mean of the no. of fissions) is around 370 keV. In a typical LMFBR and in a gas cooled Fast breeder this value is 120 keV and 176 KeV respectively.

A good example of the influence of the most important parameters on the breeding ratio. The differences between these calculations and the computer output are approximately 8%.

The rough calculations on changing the concentration of Pull, in the melt of NaCl (0.9), show a rather sharp decrease in breeding gain (BG) for decreasing plutonium concentration, especially when the plutonium molar ratio to sodium is lower than 1.

In spite of these uncertainties of the Pull3-NeCl-UC1l3 system, the influence of the U-238 in the fuel has also been calculated. For a constant PuCl3 concentration with a simplified assumption for the NaCl concentration, the results are given in Table 16.

Fission product concentration however plays a very important role. For a given reactor design and given fuel and fertile compositions, increasing the concentration of fission products (simulated here as breeding gain from 0.65 to 0.38 when the specific power decreases less than a factor two.

Table 3.14a shows that the influence of fission products is very significant (see also 3.16). However, the change of structural material of the wall from beryllium to iron has only a small effect on the breeding ratio and specific power.

In the calculations for three zones studies here, increasing the radius of the internal fertile zone from 60 cm to 80 cm, that is a volume increase of 2.37 has little effect on the total breeding ratio in spite of changes in the regional

Altering the small amounts of plutonium in the fertile material as a result of reprocessing efficiencies also has only a small effect on the breeding ratio and specific power (table 3.75b).

for separating walls for fast breeders. Graphite, 2 cm thick, was chosen as the wall material.

The results are quite encouraging. Breeding ratios using graphite are still very high, in fact slightly higher than those obtained with the complex design of three zones with fuel.

In the intermediate shell, a classical two-zone design with fuel in the central region results in a dramatic increase in specific power to a prohibitive 26 kW/cm^3 (table

Table 3.16b Two zones reactor: fluoride uranium-plutonium fue. Influence of the geometry of the reactor Number BAR. Spec. of core Internal | Intermediate External total Powe zone zone zone W/m 160 Fuel Blanket Cooling 1.424 26.7 two zone zone zone threes zone cooled reactor aut of

In such a reactor, a fuel made up of PuF3/5.4 NaF/2.4 ZrFq has been assumed. The calculations have been carried out for a larger bruner of 11 GW(th) and the fission products are assumed to be generated in a total system of 55 GW(th).  The results are not encouraging, despite the fact that the neutron flux in the target region was 1.05 times higher than expected.  These "benefits must be balanced against a specific power which is twice as high as the reference case. In the fluoride core, however, this high specific power is not realizable." This reactor does not meet the criteria of overall waste balance and of total transmutation rate.

Neutron excess 0.15 - 0.3 at the expense of being no longer a viable breeder of fissile material. Also this flux does not allow the attainment of a sufficiently high transmutation rate and is, therefore, not a feasible concept.

The conclusions of this study are that useful quantities of Cs-137 could be transmuted under the projected CTR blanket loading conditions. The reduction in Cs-137 toxicity is still be at most a factor 3 down. In addition, a study of the build-up of fission product nuclei in order to establish the requirements for periodic chemical processing and associated costs has not been carried out.

The problem of fission products cannot be eliminated by any system of fission power reactors operating in either ea stagnant or expanding nuclear power economy since the production rate exceeds the elimination rate by burnout and decay. Only at equilibrium will the production and removal rates be equal, a condition that is never attained in power reactors. Equilibrium can be obtained, however, for a system that includes the stockpile of fission products as part of the system inventory since the stockpile will grow until its decay rate equals the net production rate of the system. For the projected nuclear power economy, however, this will require a very large stockpile with its associated potential for release of large quantities of hazardous radio-isotopes to the environment. It is this stockpile that must be greatly reduced or eliminated from the biosphere. A method suggested by Steinberg et al. is transmutation in burner reactors, which are designed to maximize neutron absorption in separated fission products charged to a reactor. If sufficient numbers of these burners are used, the fission products inventory of nuclear power system can then reach equilibrium and be maintained at an irreducible minimum, which is the quantity contained in the reactors, the chemical processing plants, the transportation system, and in some industrial plants.

If it is assumed that burner reactors are desirable adjuncts to a nuclear economy, what are their design requirements and limitations? It is obvious that they must maximize (with due regard to economics) the ratio of burnout of a particular fission product to its production rate in fission reactors, and the neutron flux must be high enough to cause a significant decrease in its effective half-life. Of the fission types, the breeder reactor has the most efficient neutron economy and in principle would make the most efficient burner if all or part of the fertile material can be replaced by a Sr-Cs mixture without causing chemical processing problems or too large a perturbation in the flux spectrum because of the different characteristics of these fission products. The cost accounting in such a system would set the value of neutrons absorbed in the fission product feed at an accounting cost equal to the value of the fuel bred from those neutrons.

in a fertile material are absorbed instead in the fission product feed. The largest possible burnout ratio would then be the breeding ratio (or conversion ratio for nonbreeders) divided by the fission product yield. The estimated breeding ratio for Fhe Molten Salt Breeder Reactor (MSBR), a thermal breeder, is 95 and for the Liquid Metal Fuelled Fast Breeder Reactor but a number of other isotopes of these elements are produced which would also absorb neutrons. However, if the fission praduct waste is aged two years before separation of the cesium and strontium, the mixture will essentially be composed of however, the neutran fluxes in these designs are well below OS om=s7!. Any modifications of these designs to create high neutron fluxes will increase the neutron leakage and decrease the burnout ratios significantly. (Claiborne 1977)

In summary, it is unlikely that transmutation of fission products in fission reactors could meet any of the technical feasibility requirements for the production of stable daughters.

Which fission products are suitable candidates for transmutation and in what quantities? A simplified breakdown of neutrons and fission products produced by fission of one fissile plutonium atom is given below. From this it must be clear that only a very limited amount of fission products can be irradiated by neutrons of the whole system to retain a good breeding gain and doubling time - in other words, a self-sustaining and expanding breeding system. For further consideration, it is postulated that the maximum number of transmutable nuclides equals T = 0.3.

 How could a burner reactor be coupled to a system of breeders?  the fission products from all of these reactors can be transmuted in the high flux burner reactor, which includes of course the fission product transmutation for the burner reactor itself.

Taking a numerical example with the same values arbitrarily chosen (including also another fission product with a yield of 0.1) which is sufficient for a power system having a slowly increasing capacity with a doubling time of 100 years. This corresponds to the near-steady state case.

Is the rate of transmutation sufficient? The cross-sectional area (cm) for a given reaction is equal to the flux of the reacting particles (particles emitted/second). this value of Agee will be used later for the calculations of the neutron flux required to permit the transmutation rate to match.

 Scheme of the proposed breeding power system with self-cleaning. (For the sake of simplicity, only the routes of the fission products 90Sr and Cs are shown).

Let us assume that the energy production is based on a set of n burners and nX breeders. At a time t, (see section 5) when it is necessary to choose the most efficient way of using them in order to maximize the overall efficiency of the system.

 At time t, the nX breeders are shut down and only n burners are in operation. Later on (time t,-1), the nuclide removal is such that a re-arrangement is possible and one burner can be stopped. At the beginning of each time step tp, the p burners which are still working contain the maximum possible amount of F.P. where N(t) represents the total amount of the selected F.P.

One could imagine other schemes: for example the rearrangement could be made only when 2 burners are to be shutdown. From the reactivity point of view this solution is worse than the one proposed. Coming back to the original solution, one has still to solve at each time step (to ease) the burn-up equation. with a summation, one obtains the time t1 after which only one burner is in operation.

The two approaches give similar results, except at the end when fire burners are in operation.

For times longer than 30 minutes, only one burner is operated and the amount of F.P. decreases from

Further reductions can only be obtained by natural decay (total).

Numerical application: with X = 4, n = 100 which means the economy was based before t, on 400 breeders, the initial F.P. amount is The most important problem arises from the fact that the two nuclides Sr-90 and Cs-137 have very small cross sections for neutron absorption in both the thermal and fast regions.

 the natural decay of Cs-137 would have reduced it only by a factor 4, which demonstrates the efficiency of the burner. Also, the burning that occurs during the first period (t - tn) reduces the amount of

Transmutation reactions can be carried out in a variety of types of reactors, including research and test reactors, accelerator-driven systems, and fast breeder reactors. However, the most commonly used type of reactor for transmutation is the light water reactor (LWR), which is currently used to generate electricity in many countries around the world. The LWR can be modified to include a minor actinide burner fuel assembly that contains transuranic elements such as neptunium and americium, which are produced during normal operation of an LWR. These elements can then undergo transmutation reactions in the presence of a neutron flux generated by the fission of uranium-235 in the fuel assembly.

From the perspective of this paper, the most important process is the transmutation of some of these nuclides by neutrons in a fission reactor. The criteria given in Chapter 2 limit the choice of system. That is the number of F.P. nuclei cannot be too large in relation to the number of fissioned atoms in the burner reactor (reactor for transmutation) because the latter process also produces new fission products. the specific power of the reactor is proportional to the neutron flux. High neutron flux means high specific power, which is controlled by the effectiveness of the core cooling.

For thermal neutrons, it's approximately 700 barns and for fast neutrons, it's only 1.8 barns, which is 400 times smaller. For the given total power and the same specific power, the product Nee for the thermal reactor must be approx. 400 times smaller than for a fast reactor. Since the critical concentration of fissile nuclides in a thermal reactor can only be 10 times smaller than for a fast reactor, then for a given specific power the neutron flux in a fast reactor can be about 40 times higher than that of a thermal reactor.

The cross section for thermal neutrons for the nuclides considered here is from 3 to 10 times larger than in a fast flux, and this must be taken into account. All these factors lead us to the following solution of the problems under discussion.

The highest specific power and hence the highest neutron flux is possible if the cooling process is carried out by the fuel itself and not by a separate cooling agent only. This directs our interest towards a reactor with molten fuel in spite of the exotic nature of this solution.

The first approximation is made for an isotopically pure radionuclide, such as Cs-137 without Cs-133 (stable) and Cs-135, and also Sr-90 without Sr-88 (stable).

liquid fuel circulating through an external cooler. - transmutation of sther selectred fission products in an external thermalised zone with a thermal flux of 5x10 or coupling of one burner - high flux fast burner reactor with a system of normal power breeder reactors.

What are the limitations of a solid fuelled reactor?  Solid fuelled reactors have several limitations, including: The maximum temperature that can be achieved is limited by the melting point of the fuel material, which typically ranges from about 2000 to 3000 degrees Celsius. Solid fuels are less thermally efficient than liquid or gaseous fuels because they cannot expand and contract freely in response to changes in temperature.  The use of solid fuels requires the development of specialized fuel fabrication technologies, which can be expensive and time-consuming.  Solid fuels must be enriched with fissile material before they can be used in a reactor, which adds to their cost and complexity.

These are the self-evident limits in this case.

the rate of burning of fissile nuclides is limited due to depletion of fissile or an increase of fertile nuclides.  the boiling of the coolant. the limitation of coolant velocity, pumping power, stability. Now we discuss these limitations in more detail. the dwell time in a solid fuelled reactor in core for the fissile nuclides should not be too short.

 In a high-flux reactor, the neutron flux is usually greater than 10^14 n/cm^2 s, while in a low-flux reactor it is less than 10^13 n/cm^2 s. Dimensions: Volume Cross-section area Cladding: diam = 0.63 cm Where s = wall thickness and A heat conductivity (W/m K) an optimistic value for stainless steel is A = 0.4 W/m K, It is evident that this result is not realistic.

For this fast flux, the specific power can be assumed by taking into account the effective increase of the fission cross section due to the influence of the thermal trap. The simplified calculation results in a specific power of 10 kW per 7. This value is still rather high. A rough estimate of the thermal stress in the wall can be taken as The resulting thermal stress in the cladding wall coupled with the high flux is prohibitive.

Here, the most important problem is the local overheating by the thermal flux present at the interface of the thermal column and the solid fuel core. If, in the fast region near to the interface approx. 20% of the energy comes from the thermal neutrons, the following ratio of fluxes must be achieved: That the thermal flux must be 2000 times lower than the fast, seems very difficult to realise.

 A much better solution is to use a liquid-fueled reactor. Heat transfer from the core is accomplished by pumping and cooling the liquid fuel out of the core. For a unit cell of 1 em, which in this case consists of fuel only, we can write the following heat balance. This velocity appears to be within the practical limits proposed for a fuel-velocity of 40 m/s for a reactor with 10 kW specific power. However, this point has to be seriously investigated, as erosion due to high velocities is a problem. For a 7,000 MW(th) core with a specific power of 21 kWe/m^7, the fuel volume is about 0.330 m.  and for a fuel inlet temperature of 550°C we reach an outlet temperature of approximately 1200°C.

The idea of a liquid fuel high-flux reactor has been discussed for some years. Lane (1971), for example, writes about high-flux reactors using liquid fuels.

As an alternative some consideration has been given at Oak Ridge to the possibility of using a molten salt reactor as a fast flux test facility. The primary virtue of this approach includes the ability to achieve very high power densities and at the same time eliminate the down time associated with refuelling the reactor. A fast spectrum molten salt reactor however requires a high fissile concentration (i.e. 390 to 500 g %U/litre) in order to get mean neutron energies in the range of 10 to 50 keV. Switching from an NaF ~ UF, salt (on which the energy range

just mentioned is based) to a chloride-salt reactor would permit a higher mean energy for the same fuel concentration but would require the development of a new technology associated with the use of chlorides. Since the fast flux level is largely determined by the power density, a flux of the order of 10 or more corresponds to a peak power density in the fuel salt in a range of 5 to 10 MW/litre and to a power level of about 1009 MW(th). This means that there will be only 100 to 200 litres in the core: however, the external volume would be about 10,000 litres.

The Neutron-Physical Aspects of the High Flux Reactor gives some of the given transformations which may the amount of fission products comes from both the fast power reactor breeders and the thermal burner.  the irradiated fission products are continuously (or periodically) separated in order to eliminate the daughter stable nuclides (e.g. Zr-90 and Zr-91) from the decay and burning.

A reference burner reactor concept is shown in Figure 11. The flux trap is surrounded by a Beryllium oxide spectrum converter, a critical fuel thickness and an outer wall.

To form a thermal neutron flux trap one must naturally use neutron moderating materials. As is well known, light materials such as hydrogen can scatter neutrons past the neutron-absorbing intermediate-energy resonance region. 7H is the most efficient nuclide in this respect but also exhibits appreciable thermal absorption. Deuterium, yO, beryllium Be and carbon 12c are usual alternatives. Oxygen 50 is rather heavy though frequently already present in a molecular combination. 

 Considering chemical and physical properties, the logical materials to be used inside the lux trap are hydroxide and/or deuteroxide compounds of the FP. As shown in Figure 14A, just a small proportion of H molar fraction has a large deleterious effect.

As Sr-90 and Cs-137 also have their fair share of resonances it is advantageous to thermalise the flux before reaching the flux trap region containing these targets. Therefore a spectrum converter between flux trap and fast fuel is needed. Bearing in mind the high temperatures to be obtained in this reactor and possible chemical reactions with moist salt, H70 and D90 are unacceptable. This leaves Be, BeO and graphite or some variant therefore for consideration. Se (and DB) compounds, of course, have also to their advantage a relatively low (n,2n) threshold (1.57 MeV). Location next to a fast region can therefore produce considerable very slow neutrons in the flux trap - which is a main objective of the burner reactor. Replacement of Be by € or Ma wall material should therefore lower the FP transmutation rate and reduce the production of long-lived fission products.

 The influence of plutonium concentration (0.14C) is an important parameter of this reactor. Increasing the plutonium concentration significantly improves the transmutation rate but also increases the power density beyond a technically feasible level.

Impact of some selected parameter variations: (a) hydrogen/deuterium, (b) thickness of moderator (R60), c) plutonium concentration, and (d) power density

 Molten fuel offers the only way of handling the very high power densities of 10 GWm-%. In addition, the steep gradient of fission rate makes a molten fuel core essential since the local fission density can be one order of magnitude greater than the mean density. In a solid fuel core, the high heat removal rates would not be achievable.

The use of boron to absorb thermal neutrons results in a definite decrease in the rate of caesium transmutation (0.1/7).

The large size of the thermal flux trap results in the fuel resion approaching slab geometry with attendant high neutron leakage. To better economize on neutrons, several possibilities may be considered such as:

1) Increasing the height of the trap to reduce its thickness and improve its leakage characteristics; 2) Using a more highly enriched fuel to increase the reactivity of the system; 3) Adding control rods to absorb excess neutrons during normal operation.

To begin with, a solid Fe reflector was assumed 

The crucial parameter here is the core power density. The given value is high, but it's still near the present state of the art.

For comparison, power densities for some high-flux reactors are: - High Flux Isotope Reactor (HFIR), Oak Ridge National Laboratory, USA - 1010 MW/m^2 - Advanced Test Reactor (ATR), Idaho National Laboratory, USA - 450 MW/m^2 - Materials Testing Reactor (MTR), Los Alamos National Laboratory, USA - 370 MW/m^2



The crucial problem will be the efficiency of the external heat exchanger. In the following example, some typical heat exchanger characteristics are taken to demonstrate the possibilities (recalculated for 17 GWth).

Specific heat exchanger power 1 kW/m3 Total volume of heat exchanger for 140 m3 Volumetric fuel ratio a.3 Fuel volume in heat exchanger 3.3 m3 Fuel in the core heat exchanger piping 1.0 m3 Total fuel sut af care 4.3 m3 Fuel in core 1.0 m3 Total fuel in system 5.3 m3 Mean specific power of fuel in the 2.907 CW/m3 whole system 11 GwW(th) Plutonium content of fuel o.8 ¢Pu/em Power rating of whole system 0,385 kePu/MW(th) The postulated power rating for the 1 kePu/MW(th) For this case calculated the power 1.495 kePu/MW( th}

Parametric studies were made as variations around a reference system which assumed P = 14 GW(th) (X = 29, K = 4+2) and Retz = 785 om. The flux trap is surrounded by 5 cm BeO converter, a critical fuel thickness of 66 cm and an outer wall. Figure 19 shows the calculated flux distributions for such a burner reachtor. Note that the total flux in the fuel is similar to that in the flux trap. The calculated fluxes lead to the conclusion

(total spectrum, flux trap) = V2+(F=0.0253) The result indicates the relative effect of X on the ratio R of the FP transmutation rate to FP production rate for the reactor system. It can be seen that X should be kept as low as possible Absolute results will depend on the Cs and Sr densities in the flux trap. A value of R = 1 was achieved for both fission products.  Another important problem is the relatively high flux in the outer zone or leakage from the core.  for transmutation of other fission products which have rather a high absorption cross section.

Te-99 has a half-life of 22 billion years, while Tc-99 has a half-life of 2.1 x 10^12 years. The first isotope decays into I-99 with a decay energy of 16 keV, while the second decays into Ru-99 with a decay energy of 1.7 x 10^12 keV.

To still further improve these reactions, the use of a beryllium moderator in the form of a 5 cm wall in the outer region of the core has been calculated. This gave an improvement in the transmutation rate of Cs-137 in the inner target region but also a very significant increase in specific power due to the scattering of the neutron flux in the fuel region.

The neutron flux outside the core can also be used for breeding in a uranium blanket. The breeding ratio may be higher than 1, but the decrease in the transmutation rate is critical and seems to be too low for a burner reactor.

Nevertheless, it could be useful to check these possibilities in more detail using some of the available neutrons for breeding in an external blanket region.

The results obtained are significant but rather pessimistic. To estimate the profit of the transmutation process, the hazard index (H) must also be taken into account. From Table 4.10 it can be seen that the total reduction in hazard from both fission products equals 13.5, which is a better indication.

 The hazard coefficient is a measure of the effectiveness of a control in reducing the risk associated with a particular hazard. The hazard coefficient represents the ratio of the hazard rate for a system with a control to the hazard rate for the same system without the control. A hazard coefficient greater than 1 indicates that the control is effective in reducing the hazard, while a hazard coefficient less than 1 indicates that the control is not effective.

The hazard coefficient can be used to compare different controls and determine which one is most effective in reducing the risk associated with a particular hazard. However, it should be noted that the hazard coefficient does not take into account the cost of implementing the control or the potential side effects of the control. Therefore, other factors such as cost-effectiveness and feasibility should also be considered when selecting controls for a system.

It may be valuable to estimate the usefulness of using the concept of hazard coefficients in fission product management. Table 4.10 gives some values for Sr-90 and Cs-137. From this it can be seen that in a steady state transmutations requiring the amount of hazardous substances is reduced by a factor % 15 in relation to the steady beta-decay.

 The amount of strontium-S0, the most hazardous nuclide, in the high flux burner is about the same as that found in the power reactors after three years of operation.

However, the most impressive result comes from considering the end of the fission power area. Whereby compared to storage (natural decay with a combined half life of 39 years), the transmutation case shows that the amount of nuclides remaining will be reduced by a factor of 10,000. 

It must be remembered that the relatively high neutron flux results in the irradiation not only of the non-desirable radicactive nuclides but also the stable fission products, including the stable components of the fuel and structural material. A very short review of these particular processes is given here.

 The presence of sulfur also influences the chemistry of the molten fuel.

This chain leads to increasing amounts of stable magnesium and over longer periods, stable aluminum as well.

1. The energy balance is positive.

2. The hazardous waste balance is strongly negative. That is, the amount of hazardous material destroyed greatly exceeds the amount of freshly produced, e.g. tritium, °R, and the activation products of the structural material.

3. The rate of destruction (transmutation) is approximately one order of magnitude greater than that due to spontaneous beta decay.

4. The period in which a thousandfold reduction in the hazard can be achieved is the same as the lifetime of one reactor, that is, 20 to 40 years.

5. The neutron balance of the system is positive. That is, it permits breeding to occur along with the transmutation.

Of the weakest feature is shown in the relationship between the probability of catastrophic release to the environment for Lhe transmutation operation, Prypang» to the probability of where it is the decay constant.

Further optimizations of the system are possible.

The proposed system, a molten-salt fast reactor, while rather exotic from a technological point of view, is not as far removed from the present state of technology as some other transmutation proposals (e.g., high-flux high-energy accelerators, controlled thermonuclear reactors) may be.

An internally cooled breeder with uranium-plutonium fuel

The coolant is cooled by a cooling medium circulating in tubes. The molten fuel is intensively mixed. It remains in the core and none of it escapes.  fuel other than that being drawn off for reprocessing is present outside the core.  The unique feature of this concept is the use of a molten fertile material as the cooling medium for the core.

Such a dual function for the fertile coolant results in some unusual properties for this reactor type. The study here is concerned with a molten chloride breeder reactor. The most important features are:  electrical power: 0.85 GW in the optimum case (Norway) coolant flowing in tubes: made up of the fertile material above. No other coolant in core. The core is internally cooled. There is no circulating fuel outside the core. The fuel and coolant flow concurrently. the fuel in the core, and the coolant is pumped at a velocity of 2 and 9 m/s respectively.

The advantages of the proposed reactor are as follows - no separate coolant, no foreign cooling agent (e.g. sodium, helium etc.) in the core which results in a more satisfactory system with improved neutron balance.  the fuel inventory is very small due to lack of a separate cooling system and the small amount of core inventory due to the directly coupled reprocessing plant.  the high velocities of both fuel and coolant, significantly reduce the temperature gradients in the equilibrium state and reduce the mass transport mechanisms. These are very sensitive to temperature gradients and play a large role in the first and most important is of course corrosion. 

 The molten chloride medium, especially in neutron and gamma fields, a second aspect is radiation damage to the materials, which can lead to embrittlement or swelling, and ultimately failure.  thirdly, there are mechanical stresses induced by thermal expansion and contraction, as well as cyclic loading due to pumping action.  finally, there are issues of compatibility between different materials used in the reactor design, such as the interaction between the fuel and cladding or moderator and coolant.  the most likely structural material seems to be a molybdenum alloy, which, among other things, absorbs neutrons parasitically.  the fuel is circulated by a pump which must be located in or close to the core, increasing the corrosion problems.  the high fuel and coolant velocities result in high pumping costs and could cause severe erosion.

The relative fluxes for each group are given in Table 1.3, far core center and core boundary. The corresponding one-group spectra (flux per lethargy unit) are compared to that of the fast critical facility ZPR ~ 3 - 48. This last spectrum is slightly harder but the spectrum of the molten chlorides fast breeder compares favorably with that of a power LMFBR. From Table 5.3 one can deduce the following parameters:

For the miven core (125 cm radius) the blanket thickness was varied between 75 cm and 115 em. .4 shows the variation of breeding ratios obtained from the new transport calculations. The reactivity and the core breeding ratio remain practically constant in this range making the adjustment of the core volume unnecessary. Above 100 cm improvement of the breeding ratio by increasing the blanket thickness gives a poor return. For example, to increase The breeding ratio from 1.40 to 1.45 requires a thickness increase of 70 cm or a blanket volume increase of 32%.

Neutronics of internal cooled fast breeder Core atomic densities (atoms x 107) Pu-239 6.6797 x 10° atoms cm Blanket (coolant) densities (atoms x 192) Regi Th lid Atoms Absorption Leak Producti egion Nuclide | (03 0 yg21y orptio eakage | Production Blanket Total blanket 1.50

 -On the other hand, reactivity depends on the core radius. Figure 5.5 shows the variation of reactivity with increasing core size. Such a curve is very useful when it is required to translate the cost in reactivity of a supplementary parasitic absorption into an increase in core volume (or plutonium inventory). The transport calculations used in figure 5.5 could not be used to obtain the corresponding variations in breeding ratio, rather they have been calculated from the information in table 5.3. (assuming small core volume variation < 10% and no important changes in spectra).

The effects of modifying the core composition can be evaluated by the same method. This is arranged to avoid altering the properties of the cladding and fuel by varying the coolant tube diameter. The reactivity is very sensitive to this parameter. If e€ and n are respectively the relative increases in fuel

 It can be seen that the penalty on the total breeding ratio for the same 6K is only slightly greater while the penalty on the increase of plutonium inventory is five times less. Therefore a reduction in the diameter of the coolant tubes is preferable to an increase in coolant diameter, provided of course that an increase in coolant velocity is admissible. This last assumption is implicit in these calculations since the coolant density was

In the whole system the chlorine absorption represents 5.38%. We have seen that the GGC-3 values are different from those reported in .3 (curve 6) and assuming that the reference spectrum is unchanged, a computation of the one group cross sections gives 8.46 mb instead of 6.35 mh in the core, in the energy range (E % 9.6 MeV) is almost compensated for by the decrease at the lower energies (10 keV - 0.6 MeV).

The total absorption by chlorine for the whole system is f.57% could be replaced by a 1.9% increase in Pu inventory if a very small decrease (0.65%) of the core tube diameter is accepted. Otherwise, by changing only the core radius, a greater increase of Pu inventory (10%) is required (.5).

an energy range where oc] < 5 MeV). This fact was not perhaps recognized 15 years ago when fine spectrum calculations were not possible. This could explain the pessimistic conclusions of several eminent physicists.

For the molbydenum alloy chosen (20% Mo) the reactivity penalty (2%) is quite acceptable. However, the cost could rapidly become prohibitive if the volume of the structural material and/or the molybdenum content should increase for design reasons. In the context of more detailed design studies, this point may become more important than the definition of the proper chlorine crosssections. It does however seem likely that the molybdenum cross sections used in GGC-3 were overestimated.

is available - fluxes, one group cross sections etc. (Table 544). Using the same alloy for the vessel (20% Mo) the one group macroscopic absorption cross section is 2.55 x 10^-7 cm^2/g giving a loss of reactivity:

For 19 mm thickness, a value of 41.37% is obtained for loss of reactivity that would need to be compensated for by an increase in the amount of fissile material used. A better solution would be an increase in the plutonium inventory of about 2.1% in the reference core (loss in breeding ratio). case with the density constant to determine only the Doppler effect). The reactivity changes with respect to the reference. The Doppler effect in the fuel absorption between the capture and fission processes. The effect of full loss of coolant is quite negligible due to the effect of the reference spectrum.

In the second term, the Doppler coefficient (4.8 x 10^7) plays a negligible role. For +70°C in the fuel, the loss of reactivity is -3.8%, which is very important from a safety perspective. Compared to any kind of power reactor

This important isothermal and pessimistic coefficient is still negative. Nevertheless, during a detailed study of this reactor concept it would be necessary to check the values of the thermal expansion coefficients for fuel and coolant more carefully. The relative value of the coolant term which is positive might became too marked. This problem did not arise with the present in spherical geometry). The critical buckling load is obtained from homogeneous calculations based only on the cross section data of the core,f(E) is the asymptotic spectrum which is space independent far from the core boundary. For the same 22 energy groups one gets: 8 = 4,08 x 107 cm7. Using this value a good fit of the exact fluxes have been obtained from the complete transport calculations (.6). The asympototic fluxes cancel for where R is the critical radius of the core. The blanket savings mainly depend on the nuclear properties of the core and blanket and on the thickness of the blanket. However, for blanket thicknesses greater than 60 cm, this effect is very weak. Finally, the shape and size of the core have almost no influence on this saving. This parameter, for this reason it is so important in reactor physics, will be used in the next section for the one-dimensional cylindrical calculations.

two-dimensional transport calculations are too expensive and unsafe for use in a reactor core, and only one-dimensional calculations have been made, which are sufficiently accurate. Axial transport calculations are not required since the blanket saving is known from the spherical geometry calculations. One can therefore assume the following flux distribution:

Finally, with the previous blanket saving we get a core radius proper of Rg = 117.5 cm. The direct transport calculations with SHADOK-code gives Rg = 118 cm: This clearly indicates the value of the blanket saving concept. Nevertheless these transport calculations are still necessary because they give the radial distribution of fluxes and specific power over the whole system and more detailed informations. .6 shows some of the radial distributions of flux and specific power. The energy production in the blanket is quite small (1.7% of the core power) because no fissile materials are present (and only fast fissions occur in 38U), In practice it would be higher (say 5%) since the reprocessing process would not be able to remove all the fissile nuclides produced even with continuous fuel (coolant) reprocessing.

The critical volume is higher for cylindrical geometry (8.75 m) compared to spherical geometry (8.18 m): this increase was expected.

Most of the work on neutronic analysis for this reactor has been done using 2-D diffusion codes such as DIF3D or PANDA, but some 3-D Monte Carlo calculations have also been performed to validate the results obtained with these codes.

be used for transport calculations. Curves 5 and 6 show that the GGC-3 values were underestimated above 0.65 MeV and overestimated between 10 keV and 0.6 MeV. The effect of this on the reactivity is not great. Taking also the molybdenum cross too high, experiments made with molybdenum control rods in fast critical assemblies could not be reproduced with ENDF/8-I which makes a new evaluation of data necessary.

Fission product data are from Bodarenko (1965). The absorption cross sections for resonant nuclides are obviously shielded. The Nordheim (1961) theory is included in the GGC-S code, it requires some special data as shown in table 5.6. has an extremely high negative temperature coefficient of reactivity, since during a temperature rise some of the liquid fuel is pushed out of the core into a non-critical geometry buffer tank. The dumping of fuel in case of an incident can be done in an extremely short time. in a more serious incident when the fuel temperature increases to 1500-17009C (depending on external pressure), the fuel begins to boil. The vapour bubbles give rise to a new and unique, very high negative fuel void effect The leakage of fuel to the coolant is probably not a serious problem because the coolant is continuously recirculated. the leak of coolant into the fuel for the same reason cannot cause large problems (provided the leak remains small).

A rather adverse property of such a molten fuel reactor is the need to initially heat the solidified fuel in a non-critical mode. This problem has been fully overcome in the case of the molten fluoride thermal reactor (Qak Ridge National Laboratory). Those in which chlorides are converted to the most stable oxide appear to be fewer in number than those in the other two classes.

This property causes the rapid elimination of traces of water or oxygen in the molten chloride salts of Pu and U. It is also well known that traces of H2O and 0, have a very big influence on the corrosion rate. Molybdenum belongs to the last class, the oxide is much more stable than the chloride (178).

One can assume that this melt containing hydrogen is saturated so that the porosity of the wall (molybdenum) will play a minor role. The most important factor is the variation in the mechanical properties of the molybdenum caused by the uptake of hydrogen.

From earlier published data (Chasanav, 1965; Harder et al., 1969; Taube, 1961), it appears that the chemical state (oxidation state) of the fission product element constituents in this chloride medium requires further clarification.

From a simple consideration it seems that the freeing of chlorine from the fissioned plutonium is controlled by the fission preduct elements with standard free enthalpy of formation up to 20 KJ/mol of chlorine, that is up to molybdenum chloride. The more noble metals such as palladium, technetium, ruthenium, rhodium and probably tellurium and of course noble gases: xenon, krypton and probably iodine and bromine remain in their elementary state because of lack of chlorine. Molybdenum as a fission product with a yield of 18% from 200% all fission preducts may remain in part in metallic form. Since molybdenum also plays the role of structural material, the corrosion problems of the metallic molybdenum or its alloys are strongly linked with the fission product behaviour in this medium.

A rather serious problem arises out of the possible reaction of oxygen and oxygen-containing compounds (e.g. water) with Pulls and UC1l3 which results in a precipitation of oxides or oxychlorides. The continuous reprocessing may permit some control over the permissible level of oxygen in the entire system as well as the use of a chemical re

Corrosion of the structural material, being molybdenum is also strongly influenced by oxygen-containing substances. A protective layer of molybdenum however, may be used on same steel materials using electrodeposition or plasma spraying techniques.

Note that all these considerations have been based on standard free enthalpy: but even a change in thermodynamic activity from = ta = 0.001 which means a change in free enthalpy of 14kJ mol~ thus appears insignificant as far as these rough

FPE = fission products existing in elemental form due to the low free energy of chloride formation or negative balance of chlorine.

The separation of plutonium or uranium from irradiated fuel by means of pyrochemical techniques could be carried out for example in the following way. A molten salt primary phase containing Pu and FP metallic phase (part of FP remains in the molten salt secondary phase containing only Pu.

A mixture of hydrogen-helium gas is continuously bubbled through the liquid fuel in the core. The mean dwell time of the gas bubbles needs to be controlled and the mean transport time of the molten components to these bubbles must also be controlled (addition of a further gas stream).

1) to remove the volatile fission products which in the case of an accident control the environmental hazard (1-131, Xe-133, Kr-85 and precursors of Cs-137) and at the same time for the thermal reactor, removal of the 1-135, precursor of Xe-135, improves the neutron balance.

For the sake of a first approximation, a gas flux of 30 cm per sec. (normal state) of Ho/He is arbitrarily assumed. At 20 bar pressure and with a dwelling time in core effusion 20 seconds, the gas bubbles will only occupy a fraction of the core equal to 10-75.

The system proposed for continuous removal of the volatile fission products from the core itself has a retention time of only some hundred seconds. Each reprocessing mechanism which operates outside the core must be designed to achieve an even shorter retention time, since it is essential that any radioactive material released into the environment during normal operation or accident conditions should be minimized.

fF core is limited by the amount of molten fuel being pumped from the core to the reprocessing plant. This amount, due to the high capital cost of the fuel and high operation costs cannot be greater than that which provides a fuel in-core dwell time of about one week. Even with a 1 day dwell time, that is, if after one day the fuel goes through the reprocessing plant, no acceptable solution to the I-131 problem is obtained since the activity of this nuclide is only diminished by one order of magnitude. Only

The principal question arises from the fact that some of the short-lived iodine and bromine (perhaps also arsenic, tellurium) isotopes are the precursors of the delayed neutrons.

As other possible nuclides, Cs-142 and -143 can be considered. The removal of these delayed-neutron precursors from the core reduces the value of 8, which is lower for Pu-239 than U-235. Thus we have a problem of reaching a compromise between an as rapid as possible removal of the hazardous I-131, and as long a dwell time in the core for the delayed neutron.

in this case, the mean dwell time of iodine in the steady state reactor is about 100 seconds. It can be seen that the activity of iodine for a 2.5 GW(t) reactor is of the order of only 19 kilo curies (for seconds) activity of approx. 18% (or 103 for 1900 second extraction rate).

The gas-extraction also influences the other volatile nuclides. From a very rough estimation for these molten salts (with a small excess of free hydrogen) the following fission products and their associated precursors of iodine and bromine can be volatile at 1000°C: - Cesium-137, with its associated precursor cesium-136; - Iodine-129, with its associated precursor iodine-128; - Krypton-85, with its associated precursors krypton-84 and krypton-86; - Xenon-133, with its associated precursor xenon-132.

The rather large concentration of sulfur formed by 5Cl(n,p}5s reaction in the molten chloride system proposed for the fast reactor makes it necessary to obtain full information on the chemical behavior of radiosulphur. Recent studies on the chemical states of radiosulphur obtained by n-irradiation of alkali chlorides have shown the complexity of this problem.

Sodium chloride (Merck reagent) was heated for 60 hr at 200°C in an evacuated quartz tube. The dried sample of 100 mg sealed in a vacuum (197 torr) quartz tube was irradiated near the core of the Saphir swimming pool reactor for different periods at estimated temperatures of -190°C and 159°C. After irradiation, the samples were kept for further analysis.

8 days to allow the decay of Na.

The method of 90S-spcies separation. The crushing of the irradiated ampoule was made in a special device from which the air was removed by purging with a nitrogen stream containing 10ppM of oxygen. After crushing a gentle stream of nitrogen was allowed to flow for about 10 min. The gases evolved were collected in cooled traps. The irradiated slat was dissolved in 2 M KCN annihilant containing carriers of S7, CNS, SO,7. During dissolution oxygen was not completely excluded although nitrogen gas was passed continuously through the system. The radiosulphur found in gaseous form was determined as barium sulphate. For

the °S-species separation the chemical method described recently by Kasrai and Maddock was used. The radioactive samples were counted under a thin window Geiger counter. All measurements were made in duplicate with and without Al-absorber.

Post-irradiation heating. The sealed irradiated ampules were heated in an electric oven at 770°C for 2 hr or at 830°C for about 5 min., and then cooled and crushed in a closed system under a stream of nitrogen.

he irradiation time. Formation of S> is indicated by charge onservation during the °Cl{n,p)°S reaction. Alternatively it an be supposed that reduction of sulphur takes place by capture electrons due to the discharge of F-centers. The presence of in this oxidation state in the lattice is no longer contested. he precursors of higher forms may be S as a result of an elecron lass from S°. However, the interaction of chlorine antities ormed by irradiation with radiosulphur to form species as SCl, Cla, Stl, may be an important mechanism in forming the percursors of sulphate and sulphite.

During longer irradiations some of the sulphide is converted into oxysulphides. The oxidation of radiosulphur with increase of radiation damage concentration may also be due to the reaction of recoil sulphur with chlorine atoms. The presence of OH in the crystal must not be neglected. It has been suggested that radiolysis of GH can be responsible for accelerating the Effect of post-irradiation heating. The effect of post-irradiation heating (including melting) is shown in Table 7.1.

Comparisons between heated and unheated samples are made for irradiations of 2, 12 and 24 hrs. For a 2-hr irradiation, results NaCl are also presented. As is seen, on heating, a part of the radiosulphur is found in a volatile form. The volatile radiosulphur appears at the expense of S° and higher oxidation forms. The results show that with temperatures above the boiling point of sulphur and abave melting point of NaCl, the S° and S,/or S,Cly receive sufficient kinetic energy to migrate to the surface or even to escape from the crystal and be collected as volatile radiosulphur. However, there are some differences in the 7°57 chemical distribution on heating below and above the melting point of NaCl (experiments 2-3). It seems that for relatively short periods of irradiation (2 hr) only the sulphate and sulphite precursors account for the volatile radiosuiphur fraction. For longer irradiation times, however, the sulphide precursor also contributes to the volatile radiosulphur fraction.

To about 2% and this corresponds to an increase in the volatile sulfur content (experiments 5, 7). However, a small and practically constant yield of SO2 is found in the melt after longer irradiation.

No significant changes are observed for the sulphide and higher oxidation forms. Comparing these results with those presented in  shows that in the post-irradiation melted samples, the radiation damage has a different effect than in the unmelted ones.

In the molten state, the active oxidizing agents have a different identity than those present below melting. The presence of oxygen and possibly sodium oxide during melting may have a determining role in deciding the state of the radioactive sulfur.

Table 7.2 shows that the higher oxidation fraction is lower (3%) at 77 K. As is seen, the increased S° after low temperature irradiation occurs at the expense of the sulphate + sulphite and sulphide fractions. The defects with oxidising and reducing character formed by low temperature irradiation such as F and V-centres for derivatives) become important factors in determining the radiosulphur behaviour.

Significant amounts of the order of magnitude of thousands of opm 3°S would be present as steady-state concentration in a proposed fast breeder reactor fuelled with molten Pu/U-chlorides diluted in NaCl. To obtain information about the chemical behaviour, mainly the distribution of oxidation-states, the influence of irradiation temperatures (-190 and 15°C) and the effects of a post-irradiation heat treatment, solid NaCl was investigated and the results published. The subject of the present note are investigations at higher irradiation temperatures, especially with samples molten during irradiation.

device permitted temperatures of up to 750°C only. crushed slat-mixture was dried in vacuo at 250°C for subsequently treated with dried HCl-gas at 390°C for order to remove traces of water and hydroxides. 100 were weighed into quartz ampoules in a glove-box with foil and closed by folding the foil. The ampoules are subjected to a pressure of less than 19°C (24 hrs).

The ampoules were crushed re in a nitrogen atmosphere, volatile reaction by a nitrogen gas-stream into cold-traps cooled gen and the samples subsequently dissolved in Rinse solution containing cyanide and sulphide, nitrate and sulphate as carriers. The fractions independently oxidized to sulphate, precipitated as sulphates, activities measured with a thin-window GM-counter.

To compare the CaCl/KCl-system with pure NaCl, a series of experiments was conducted using pure NaCl as well.

The experiments at 1509 on Nall the existing published results show that slat drying in vacuo only. with molten samples show a monotone and a corresponding increase of the by the pre-irradiation treatment no and is always about 20%. Melting of does not influence the distribution studies at 1509C show for Nall/KCi in S7 towards higher oxidation-state pure NaCl. No influence of the precursor could be shown at 1509C, but it is malten samples. Untreated samples showed S7-levels of less than 2%.

In the shell type core, achieving the highest possible flux requires a fast spectrum, which requires a relatively high power input. To achieve this, the fuel flow rate must be kept high.

In the central regions, a thermal neutron flux is obtained (Beryllium coated Deuterium hydroxide as moderator). The thermal neutron flux extends partly into the fast care which causes a very high and localised power density. This is the reason for requiring a high fuel turbulence.

which varied between $359°C and 9659C. For various reasons, a reference concept was used as a basis for the calculations. See [2]. A description of the reference design is also given in [3]. The relevant characteristics are given in the following figures:

The most important parameter for the external heat exchanger was selected as the volume of fuel contained in it. The decisive factor is the minimization of the fuel volume existing outside the core,

This type of reactor has fuel circulating in the core with a relatively low temperature gradient of approximately 35°C and a high neutron capacity, and a high velocity coolant flowing through the core at approx. 700 m/s with again a low temperature gradient of approx. 43°C and high heat capacity. This, coupled with the very high negative temperature coefficient of reactivity results in an unusually high negative thermal and

Decrease of the fuel circulation and/or coolant velocity (in the U-tubes) results in a definite and automatic decrease of reactor power without recourse to engineered methods. This points to such a reactor being surprisingly stable and self regulating device.

Such a forced circulation system (core only) can be one of the following types - pump installed directly in the core, pump outside the core, an external pump with injector, a gas lift pump using inert gas. Consideration of the factors involved using criteria such as reduction of the out-of-core inventory, elimination of additional heat exchangers, minimization of the fuel leakage, minimization of the auxiliary power, and optimization of the fuel flow regulation - all point to an in-core pump solution. Of course this requires considerable technical problems (cooling of the rotor, corrosion and erosion, maintenance, neutron activation etc.).

The fuel bulk temperature changes from gsa°c at the bottom to 965°C at V4 core height and is ag8° Cat 3/4 of core height. The coolant temperature lies between 750 C inlet and 793°C outlet Both these small temperature gradients in the fuel and in the. coolant (fertile material) may prove beneficial in reducing corrosion processes due to the minimizing of mass transport.

parameters. Two of them are the velocity of the coolant and its bulk temperature. The mean power output of the core is strongly influenced by these parameters, which are usually adjusted to maintain a constant reactor power level.

From 12ms to 1mes, the coolant outlet temperature increases from 784°C to 893°C for a constant inlet temperature of 50°C. This change of coolant velocity and its bulk temperature results in the decrease of the mean core output from 2.088 GwWlth) to 0.598 Gw(th) - that is approximately a factor 3! It is clear since the ower coolant velocity results in a higher coolant outlet temperature and lower power output we have definite negative temperature coefficient (power output) varying with the given coolant velocity.

If the fuel velocity falls from 2 ms! to 0.8 mes we again get an important decrease of power output (see .18}. The decrease in both fuel and coolant velocity results in a sharp decrase of reactor power. This means that such a reactor can be considered as a surprisingly stable and self regulating device. In the case of a sudden fall in coolant and/or fuel velocities, the power output decreases to a safe level without intervention.

Intensive consideration of the factors involved, using criteria such as - reduction of the out of score inventory, elimination of additional heat exchangers, minimization of the fuel leakage, minimization of the auxilliary power, optimisation of the fuel flow regulation, points to an in-core pump solution. Of course this gives rise to considerable technical problems (cooling of the rotor, corrosion and erosion, maintenance, neutron activation

