A limited program of postoperation examinations was completed during this period. The work on the radioactive systems was done through the maintenance shield using tools specially developed and tested in mockups. The control rods, rod thimbles, and one graphite moderator element were removed, and the interior of the reactor vessel was viewed. The interior of the fuel pump bowl was also viewed through a hole left by excision of the sampler cage. A section of the primary heat exchanger shell was cut out, and portions of six tubes were removed. The salt leak that occurred during the final shutdown was located at a freeze valve and was cut out for inspection. The tools and procedures worked well, and conditions in the reactor were found to be generally very good.

The differential-pressure system on the coolant salt flowmeter was tested and found to be in error by 6.7 percent. Correction of all known errors brings the heat-balance value for full power down to 7.65 Megawatt.

Less uranium was recovered from the Uranium hexafluoride absorbers than had been expected on the basis of salt inventory measurements at the time of the fuel processing in 1968. Careful review of all evidence indicates that about 2.6 kilograms of uranium (33 percent Uranium-235) was left somewhere in the molten salt reactor processing plant. A uranium search procedure based on neutron interrogation of closed vessels was tested but proved insufficiently sensitive.

Exploratory design and evaluation studies of a 300-Megawatt molten-salt demonstration reactor were continued. In these studies, the design conditions are made less stringent than those in our molten salt breeder reactor reference design. For example, the reactor would operate as a converter so as not to await demonstration of the advanced processing system being designed for the breeder, and the power density would be reduced so that the graphite core would have a life of 30 years. The graphite would not have to be sealed to reduce the permeation by xenon, and rapid fuel reprocessing would not be necessary. By substituting periodic salt replacement for continuous fuel processing the reactor could operate with a conversion ratio of about 0.8 until the chemical plant was fully developed.

The molten salt demonstration reactor reactor vessel design has not been revised since last reported, but the general flowsheet, the drain tank, the primary heat exchangers, steam generators and reheaters, and the cells and building have all been changed in an investigation of a salt-circulation loop interposed between the secondary system and the steam system or to otherwise modify the system parameters. The heat transport fluid used in the third loop would be a nitrate-nitrite mixture which would form water of any tritium diffusing into it from the coolant salt and would thus block escape of tritium into the steam system. Use of the nitrate-nitrite salt also makes it possible to construct the steam generators and reheaters of less expensive materials and to deliver feedwater and reheat steam to the boilers and reheaters at conventional temperatures rather than at the abnormally high values specified for the molten salt breeder reactor. The fluid used to transport heat from the primary heat exchangers to the secondary exchangers would be changed from the previously proposed sodium fluoroborate to Lithium fluoride and Beryllium fluoride, a salt used successfully in the molten salt reactor and one which poses few problems if it were to leak into the fuel salt.

In the molten salt demonstration reactor the drain tank is not used as an overflow volume for the pump bowls, and only one small pump is used to transfer salt from the tank when filling the primary system. The sump tanks of the main circulation pumps now provide the surge volume. A valve in which a thin film of salt is frozen between 2 movable poppet and the seat to effect the final leak-tight closure is proposed for use in the reactor drain line. The valve in the drain line from the cell catch basin would be sealed with a membrane that would be ruptured in the unlikely event that the line is needed.

The primary and secondary heat exchangers were redesigned to use the new secondary and tertiary salts and to account for lowering the fuel salt temperature from the reactor outlet to 1250 degrees Fahrenheit. As could be expected, the exchangers have more surface than those in previous concepts.

The design of the heated equipment cells was changed to incorporate water cooling of the cell walls. The method of heating the cells was changed from use of radiant electrical heaters to circulation of hot nitrogen gas. The gas can also be cooled and used to cool some equipment.

The temperature transients following shutdown of the reactor and draining of the primary and secondary salts were calculated for heat exchangers of the design proposed for the molten salt breeder reactor reference plant. Decay of fission products on the metal surfaces provides the heat source, and the heat is radiated to the surroundings, which are at 1000 degrees Fahrenheit. It is conservatively estimated that the maximum temperatures would reach 2150 and 1850 degrees Fahrenheit, respectively, in heat exchangers of 563- and 141-Megawatt capacity at about 2.7 hours after shutdown.

An analysis was started to determine the conse- quences of the mixing of primary and secondary salts that would result from the rupture of a tube in a primary heat exchanger of an molten salt breeder reactor.

Additional studies were made of methods for keeping small the amount of tritium that reaches the steam system in an molten salt breeder reactor plant; 0.2 percent or less would reach the steamn if essentially all the tritium and tritium fluoride were stripped from a side steam of 10 percent of the circulating fuel salt flow in a countercurrent contactor. Use of helium containing a small volume  percentage of water vapor as the coolant in the secondary system in place of the sodium fluoroborate salt would inhibit the transport to the steam. Continuous addition and removal of hydrogen fluoride in the sodium fluoroborate in the secondary system would be effective in reducing the transport of tritium to the steam if the rate were more than 507 times the tritium production rate and the hydrogen fluoride did not react rapidly with the metal walls.

A report was issued that outlined the objectives and design bases of the molten salt breeder experiment and provided a brief description of a reference reactor. Our reference reactor has a graphite core 45 inch in diameter and 57 inch high containing 15 volume percent salt. The core is centered in a 7.5 feet inner diameter spherical vessel, with the space between the graphite and the vessel wall filled with fuel salt. The design power is 150 Megawatt, and the start of life breeding ratio is 0.96.

We continued design studies to determine the problem areas and to evaluate possible solutions. Major emphasis was on maintenance of the core graphite and the primary heat exchanger. We also prepared new layouts of the cell and primary system to help indicate how the problems would be handled in the different configurations.

Alternate core moderator element configurations were investigated. A cylindrical element design appears attractive except that it requires a 20.5 percent salt fraction, as compared with 15 percent for the prismatic element. Since the elements do not interlock, this concept lends itself to removal of individual elements by a handling machine.

We sized the primary heat exchanger, holding the tube length constant at the 28 feet proposed for the molten salt breeder reactor. This design, with salt on the tube side, utilizes 1340 tubes three eighths inch in diameter in a 31.5 inch inner diameter shell.

Calculations of the neutronic performance of the reference single-fluid molten salt breeder reactor have been brought up to date by modifying fission product removal rates to conform to the recently adopted metal transfer process. In addition, a few minor data corrections and cross section revisions were included in these calculations. The results indicate a slightly higher breeding ratio for the new processing scheme (1.071 as compared with 1.063) and a very slightly lower fissile inventory (1487 kilograms as compared with 1504 kilograms). The most important differences in the neutron balance are the absence of absorptions in plutonium, with the new process, reduced absorptions in fission products, and a higher value of 7, because a higher proportion of the fissile material is Uranium-233.

Studies of the possible performance of a 1000-Megawatt molten-salt converter reactor have been continued. Some recent calculations were based on the core design of a “permanent-core” molten salt breeder reactor, that is, one whose peak power density is low enough to permit the graphite to have a design life of 24 full-power years. In place of the breeder’s continuous, rapid chemical processing, however, we assumed the occasional discard of the carrier salt, with recovery and recycle only of the uranium in the salt. Batch cycles of six and eight full-power years and variations in salt composition were studied. Results indicate that the batch-cycle converter reactor should be operated with about the same salt composition as the breeder, for a given core design optimized for breeding. Reoptimization for different salt compositions might well reduce the apparent sensitivity of the reactor performance to salt composition. The calculations indicate that a conversion ratio of 0.9 or higher, with a fuel cycle cost of 0.55 to 0.65 mills per kilowatthours, can be achieved with plutonium feed and a batch fuel replacement cycle of six full-power years. Reactor physics experiments with an molten salt breeder reactor lattice configuration have been initiated in the High-Temperature Lattice Test Reactor at the Pacific Northwest Laboratory. These experiments include measurements of the neutron multiplication factor at temperatures from 300 to 1000 degrees Celsius, along with the reactivity effects of varying fuel density, of changing the lattice configu- ration, and of inserting various materials in the lattice, including simulated control rods. Results of these measurements will be used to check the accuracy of nuclear data and computational models used in molten salt breeder reactor design studies.

The construction of the water test loop for testing molten salt breeder experiment-scale gas separators and bubble generators was completed, and operation was begun. The loop was operated primarily on demineralized water at liquid flow rates of 200 to 550 gallons per minute. The loop was also operated with water containing small amounts of n-butyl alcohol and sodium oleate and with a 41.5 percent glycerin-water mixture which is hydraulically similar to fuel salt. The bubble generator operated satisfactorily, and the bubble separatoroperated satisfactorily with water. An unexplained reduction in bubble size was observed when the test fluid was changed from demineralized water to the other fluids, and the separator was unable to remove the small bubbles at the required rate. Tests were started to determine if the production of small bubbles was influenced by the pump efficiency or only the pump head. It is believed that the small bubbles are a characteristic of the test fluid and that they will not be produced in salt.

The conceptual design of a molten-salt loop for testing gas systems was completed, and the conceptual system design description was written. Work is now beginning on the preliminary design. The facility will be used for developing the technology of the fuel salt for molten salt reactors and in particular for tests of the bubble generator and separator. The facility is scheduled for initial operation in early fiscal year 1973.

The conceptual systems design description of the 3-Megawatt test facility to be built as part of the molten-salt steam generator program was completed, and further work was suspended until late in fiscal year 1972.

Following completion of the fluoroborate test program in the PKP test loop, the salt pump rotary element, the bubbler tube for Boron trifluoride feed and salt level indication, and other items of hardware were removed for examination. The appearance of the pump rotary element indicated that the fluoroborate service did not cause excessive corrosion damage to the Inconel system. Deposits of Trisodium hexafluorochromate(III) and Sodium Nickel(III) fluoride; found in the bubbler tube were attributed to reaction of the fluoroborate salt with moisture introduced in the gas feed. A deposit of metallic nickel which blocked the mouth of the bubbler tube was probably formed by transfer of corrosion product nickel from the bulk salt. The condition of the gas pressure control valve was found to be like new.

The conceptual system design description for the coolant salt technology facility was completed, and the detailed design of the facility and components was begun. We make maximum use of the drawings from the PKP-1 test stand and of the components and materials to be salvaged from the molten salt reactor. The expected completion date of the facility is late December 1971.

The salt was drained satisfactorily from the main loop of the molten salt reactor Mark 2 pump test stand after replacing the plugged drain line which connects the loop piping to the storage tank. The rotary element and pump tank of the molten salt reactor coolant salt pump were inspected visually as the pump was removed from the coolant salt system. Except for evidence of leakage oil from the lower shaft seal on shield plug and tank surfaces, the pump appeared to be in very satisfactory condition.

The water test program to qualify the ALPHA pump for the hydraulic conditions required in the molten salt reactor FCL-2 test facility was concluded satisfactorily. The design and fabrication of the remaining parts needed for the pump for the facility were then completed.

Most of the work previously supported by the molten salt reactor remote welding program has been transferred into an automated welding program sponsored by the Liquid Metal Fast Breeder Reactor program to meet their needs in reactor pipe construction and maintenance. We are, however, completing a small program to develop and test weld-torch positioning mechanisms and control circuitry; to define remote maintenance inspection, viewing, and alignment criteria; and to investigate pipe cleanliness requirements for maintenance welding in salt systems. Preliminary tests have shown that small pipe filled with solid molten salt can be welded after a rather simple cleaning procedure and that these welds satisfy nuclear code x-ray inspection standards.

A hybrid computer simulation model of the reference 1000-Megawatt molten salt breeder reactor is being developed. The steam generator is modeled mathematically on the hybrid machine in continuous space and discrete time using sets of differential equations derived from the conservation of momentum, energy, and mass. The integrations are performed by the analog computer, while the digital computer calculates the terms of the derivatives of the differential equations and provides storage and control for the calculations. The thermodynamic properties of water are stored in the digital computer as two-dimensional tables.

The model of the reactor, primary heat exchanger, and piping, is a continuous-time model similar to those traditionally used on analog computers and is time scaled to 0.01 of real time. The discrete-time steam generator calculations are stored and sampled at 1 second intervals, representing 0.01 second in simulation time, then smoothed and applied to the continuous-time analog model.

The hybrid program for the steam generator has been written and nearly debugged. The analog model has been developed, but has not yet been patched. Integration of the two models will require some additional time, and the total simulation is expected to be in operation during the next reporting period.

Heat transfer studies using the inert-gas-pressurized flow system have shown that the average heat transfer coefficient for a proposed molten salt breeder reactor fuel salt at 1070 degrees Fahrenheit and a Reynolds modulus of 3300 is 15 percent higher with a hydrodynamic entrance length than without. These results are difficult to explain in terms of commonly accepted theories of the combined development of hydrodynamic and thermal boundary layers, but can be explained by a recent theory which suggests that the flow of a fluid whose viscosity has a large negative temperature dependence will be stabilized by heating. The present results tend to substantiate this theory.

A new technique for determining the wetting charac- teristics of liquids was used to study wetting behavior of the molten salt Lithium Fluoride-Beryllium Fluoride-Zirconium tetrafluoride-Thorium tetrafluoride-Uranium tetrafluoride (70-23- 5-1-1 mole percent) on a Hastelloy Nickel surface at 700 degrees Celsius (1292 degrees Fahrenheit). It was found that the typical nonwetting condition of this salt could be changed to a wetting condition within several minutes by the introduction of a zirconium rod. Several hours were required to change from the wetting back to the nonwetting condition by the addition of 1 weight percent nickel fluoride.

Water calibration of an improved variable-gap thermal conductivity apparatus designed for use with molten salts at 830 degrees Celsius gave results in excellent agreement with the specialized room-temperature measurements published in the literature. Thermal conductivity measurements are being made for the molten fluoride salt system Lithium Fluoride-Beryllium Fluoride. Molten salt breeder reactor-related mass transfer experiments involving diffusion of oxygen dissolved in glycerin-water solutions into helium bubbles have been extended to include the case of horizontal flow. The volume fraction of bubbles, which is needed to determine the interfacial area per unit volume, was found to correlate with the ratio of axial to thermal velocity of bubble rise. By making use of the interfacial area derived from the bubble volume fraction correlation, overall mass transfer coefficients (including the separator) have been extracted from the measured concentration decay rate of dissolved oxygen for a Reynolds modulus range from 26,000 to 66,000 at one value of the Schmidt modulus 1228. When these recent results are compared with earlier results for vertical flow, it is found that, at a sufficiently high Reynolds modulus for gravitational forces to be negligible compared with inertial forces, the mass transfer coefficients for vertical and horizontal flow become identical. Mass transfer coefficients for the horizontal test section, corrected by subtracting the measured mass transfer which occurs in the separator, are correlated with Reynolds modulus for three values of mean bubble diameter.

A theoretical description of mass transfer from a turbulent liquid to bubbles moving at the local liquid velocity has been developed which includes variation in eddy diffusivity with concentration gradient near a bubble interface, velocity, and frequency components of the turbulence. A computer program has been written to solve the pertinent equations.

Several components from the molten salt reactor primary circuit were examined. The graphite moderator element was in excellent condition, with no detectable dimensional changes. There was no metallographic evidence of corrosion. There was a shallow surface layer about 2 mils deep having a modified structure that we attribute to surface working. All metal surfaces exposed to the fuel salt were embrittled to a depth of 5 to 10 mils as evidenced by grain boundary cracking to a depth of 5 to 10 mils. The failure was located in freeze valve 105 and was attributed to thermal fatigue.

The routine evaluation of vendor-furnished graphites has been essentially completed, and the irradiation program is rapidly shifting to the investigation of experimental graphites exhibiting the desired structural variations. In support of this, the fabrication effort on graphite has expanded. In the study of precursor chemistry, the effect of hetero atoms is being investigated. These materials lead to a deterioration in crystal perfection, but also lead to the desired isotropicity of the cokes and graphites. Raw cokes and blacks are currently being fabricated into isotropic graphites with the required monolithic structure. This work is still in its early stages, but the fabricated bodies look most promising.

The black-based graphites discussed in the previous semiannual report continue to be irradiated. Heat treatment series have been prepared and characterized.

At the level of fundamental understanding, the distortions around an interstitial cluster have been calculated from elastic continuum theory, and the phonon dispersion curves have been measured by neutron scattering.

Postirradiation tests on laboratory melts of modified Hastelloy Nickel have shown that acceptable properties can be obtained with additions of 1.5 to 2.5 percent Titanium, at least 0.5 percent Hafnium, and multiple additions of Titanium, Hafnium, and Niobium. Small commercial melts have confirmed the beneficial effects of Titanium and Niobium but have not reproduced the beneficial effects of Hafnium. The creep strength of all of the modified alloys is higher than that of standard Hastelloy Nickel. Weld metal cracking was encountered with high Hafnium and Zirconium concentrations, but suitable welds were made using standard Hastelloy Nickel as a filler metal. The evidence is quite encouraging that an alloy with 1.5 to 2.5 percent Titanium will have adequate postirradiation properties.  Corrosion tests of Hastelloy Nickel in Lithium Fluoride, Beryllium fluoride, Uranium tetrafluoride, Thorium tetrafluoride, salts continue to give very low corrosion rates, less than 0.1 mil per year. Tests in sodium fluoroborate now involve four thermal convection loops and two pump loops. The corrosion rates vary from 0.1 to several mils per year, depending on salt purity. Evidence indicates that the impurities most affecting the corrosion are water and oxygen. A test to study tritium retention in sodium fluoroborate by exchange with H showed that the tritium was released quickly by the salt, indicating a lack of stable hydrogen in the salt. Hastelloy Nickel specimens exposed to steam at 538 degrees Celsius continue to show a metal loss rate of less than 0.25 mil peryear.

An improved flowsheet was developed in which protactinium is isolated from the fuel salt of an molten salt breeder reactor and held for decay in a secondary salt stream that is physically and chemically isolated from the reactor. A processing plant based on this flowsheet should be much easier to control than one based on the earlier flowsheet, and a considerable saving in capital equipment cost should result. A method for combining and fluorinating the various waste streams from the metal transfer process and the protactinium isolation system was developed. This will eliminate several potential routes for loss of fissile material from the system.

Oxide precipitation is being considered as an alternative to the fluorination—reductive-extraction method for isolating protactinium and for subsequently removing uranium from the fuel salt of an molten salt breeder reactor. Two possible flowsheets based on oxide precipitation were developed, and the effects of several parameters on operation of the processes were investigated. In the first flowsheet, the isolated protactinium is held in a secondary salt from which the uranium is removed by fluorination. In the second flowsheet, the isolated protactinium is dissolved in processed fuel carrier salt from the metal transfer process, and the resulting stream is recycled thoursough a protactinium decay tank to the protactinium oxide precipitator. The precipitator efficiency required for these flowsheets is 60 to 80 percent for the first flowsheet and about 96 percent for the second.

Although the molten salt breeder reactor processing flowsheets considered thus far have uniformly resulted in very low uranium inventories in the processing plant, several potential processing systems may result in uranium inventories as large as 5 to 10 percent of the reactor inventory. A processing plant uranium inventory of 5 percent of the system fissile inventory would increase the fuel cycle cost by about 0.015 mill per kilowatthours and would increase the system doubling time from 22 to 23.1 years. While there is incentive for maintaining a low uranium inventory in the processing plant, it does not appear that a uranium inventory as high as 5 to 10 percent of the system fissile inventory would rule out an otherwise attractive processing system.

The second engineering experiment on the metal transfer process for the removal of rare earths from single-fluid molten salt breeder reactor fuel salt has been completed. The experiment operated satisfactorily for about thoursee months. before it was shut down for inspection. During that period, more than 85 percent of the lanthanum and more than 50 percent of the neodymium originally in the fuel carrier salt were removed and deposited in a lithium-bismuth solution. There was no measurable accumulation of thorium in the lithium-bismuth solution, thus demonstrating that the rare earths can be removed without significant removal of thorium. The thorium-lanthanum decontamination factor was about 10 percent. The distribution coefficients for lanthanum and neodymium between the fluoride salt and the thorium-saturated bismuth were relatively constant and in agreement with expected values. The distribution coefficients for lanthanum and neodymium between lithium chloride and thorium-saturated bismuth were somewhat higher than expected. When the vessel was disassembled for inspection after the run, the condition of the interior of the vessel was generally good; however, some corrosion had occurred on the components made of thin carbon steel (the lithium-bismuth container and the sparge tubes).

The third engineering experiment for development of the metal transfer process is presently being designed. This experiment will use flow rates that are 1 percent of the estimated flow rates for a 1000-Megawatt(e) reactor. Mechanical agitators will be used to promote efficient contacting of the salt and metal phases. The three vessels required for the experiment will be made of carbon steel; one of the vessels has already been fabricated. A test vessel has been fabricated that will be used with salt and bismuth for testing the proposed agitator drive unit, the shaft seal, the performance of a vapor- deposited layer of tungsten on the vessel interior, and a new technique for applying nickel aluminide coatings to the exterior of carbon-steel vessels.

A program has been initiated for the development of mechanically agitated salt-metal contactors as an alternative to packed columns presently considered for the molten salt breeder reactor processing system. Studies to date have been concerned primarily with selection of a contactor design for the third metal transfer experiment. Tests with mercury and water using a four-bladed flat-paddle agitator located in the mercury-water interface frequently resulted in a stable dispersion of very small mercury droplets and entrainment of water in the mercury. We have begun studies of a contactor which has a paddle operating in each phase, well away from the interface, at a speed that does not result in the dispersion of either phase.

We have continued to study the extraction of uranium from molten salt by countercurrent contact with bismuth containing reductant in a packed column. Two successful runs, which included six periods of steady-state operation covering metal-to-salt flow ratios ranging from 0.75 to 2.05, have been made. The data could be correlated by an HTU model based on the assumption that the uranium transfer rate was controlled entirely by the diffusive resistance in the salt phase. The observed HTU values ranged from 0.77 to 2.1 ft and were inversely proportional to the metal-to-salt flow rate ratio. Flooding data obtained during countercurrent flow of salt and bismuth in the packed column have continued to show good agreement with predictions based on studies with a mercury-water system. Preparations were begun for mass transfer experiments in which the rate of exchange of zirconium isotopes will be measured between salt and bismuth phases otherwise at equilibrium in a packed column. The first experiment of. this type had to be terminated because of a salt leak, which necessitated replacement of the salt feed-and-catch tank.

Studies of hydrodynamics in packed columns during the countercurrent flow of high-density liquids are being made in order to evaluate and design contactors for processing systems based on reductive extraction.

Data obtained by an MIT Practice School group show that the slip velocity with nonwetted packing is dependent on the  0.167 power of the continuous- phase viscosity rather than being independent as was previously assumed. Knowledge of the dependence of slip velocity on the continuous-phase viscosity allowed calculation of the power dependence of slip velocity on the difference in densities of the phases. A power dependence of 0.5 was calculated rather than the previously assumed dependence of 1.0. Studies with packing wetted by the metal phase indicate a substantial reduction in interfacial area between the phases and an increase in the slip velocity.

27 runs were made with the simulated continuous fluorinator to determine heat generation rates in a column- of nitric acid (used as a stand-in for molten salt), in the pipe surrounding the acid column (representing the fluorinator wall), and in induction- coils of thoursee different designs. Air was bubbled thoursough the nitric acid at rates up to 2.16 Standard Cubic Feet per Hour, resulting in bubble volume fractions as high as 18 percent, to determine the effect of bubbles on the heat generation rate in the acid. Efficiencies predicted for heating molten salt in a fluorinator using the best coil design tested to date ranged from 37.0 percent with no bubbles to 32.9 percent with a bubble fraction of 15 percent. These efficiencies are sufficiently high to allow operation of a fluorinator having a 4.5 inch inner diameter molten zone and a 1.5 inch thick frozen salt layer by using an available radio frequency generator.

Rate constants for the corrosion of Nickel-200 and Nickel-201 in gaseous fluorine at l-atm pressure were calculated from literature data, assuming that the reaction follows a parabolic rate law; the calculated rate constants were correlated with temperature, assuming an Arrhenius temperature dependence. The resulting data were then used to estimate average corrosion rates when the Nickel(II) Fluoride protective film is periodically destroyed. Average corrosion rates of 2.9 and 0.97 mils per year for Nickel-200 and Nickel-201, respectively, were estimated at 450 degrees Celsius (a typical fluorinator wall temperature) when the Nickel(II) Fluoride, film was assumed to be destroyed 52 times annually. These corrosion rates are acceptable for long-term fluorinator operation.

Studies of the effect of column diameter on axial dispersion in open bubble columns were extended to include a 6-inch diameter column, and additional data were obtained on the effect of the viscosity of the liquid. The dispersion coefficient values obtained with a 6 inch diameter, 72 inch long column were about three times the values measured at the same superficial gas velocity in a 3 inch diameter column; the data show little dependence on superficial gas velocity. The dispersion coefficient in a 6 inch diameter column is not noticeably affected by changing the viscosity of the liquid from 0.9 to 12 cP. The same change in viscosity in a 2 inch diameter column results in a 20 percent decrease in dispersion coefficient. However, since the diameter of continuous fluorinators will be 6 inch or larger, the viscosity of the liquid will not affect the dispersion coefficient.

An engineering-scale experiment to study the precipi- tation of uranium oxide from molten salt breeder reactor fuel salt, from which the protactinium has been previously removed, is being designed. In this experiment, uranium will be precipitated from 2 liters of fuel salt in a single-stage batch operation by contact with an argon-steam mixture. The design of the precipitator vessel is described.

Very little additional design work on the processing materials test stand and the molybdenum reductive-extraction equipment has been done pending development of molybdenum fabrication techniques. The plastic model of the head pot was tested and modified, an improved design is ready for final testing.

To date, 11 iron fluoride reduction runs have been carried out in order to study the countercurrent contact of molten salt with hydrogen in a packed column. In the first thoursee runs, iron fluoride mass transfer coefficients averaged 0.016 feet per hours. Coefficients for the succeeding runs are questionable because of inconsistent iron analyses.