The objective of the Molten-Salt Reactor Program is the development of nuclear reactors which use fluid fuels that are solutions of fissile and fertile materials in suitable carrier salts. The program is an outgrowth of the effort begun over 20 years ago in the Aircraft Nuclear Propulsion program to make a molten-salt reactor power plant for aircraft.

Completion of this six-month run brought to a close the first phase of molten salt reactorE operation, in which the objective was to demonstrate on a small scale the attractive features and technical feasibility of these systems for civilian power reactors. We concluded that this objective had been achieved and that the molten salt reactor experiment had shown that molten-fluoride reactors can be operated at 1200 degrees Fahrenheit without corrosive attack on either the metal or graphite parts of the system, the fuel is stable, reactor equipment can operate satisfactorily at these conditions, xenon can be removed rapidly from molten salts, and, when necessary, the radioactive equipment can be repaired or replaced.

Because of limitations on the chemical processing methods available at the time, until three years ago most of our work on breeder reactors was aimed at two-fluid systems in which graphite tubes would be used to separate uranium-bearing fuel salts from thorium-bearing fertile salts. In late 1967, however, a one-fluid breeder became feasible because of the development of processes that use liquid bismuth to isolate protactinium and remove rare earths from a salt that also contains thorium. Our studies showed that a one-fluid breeder based on these processes can have fuel utilization characteristics approaching those of our two-fluid designs. Since the graphite serves only as moderator, the one-fluid reactor is more nearly a scaleup of the molten salt reactor experiment. These advantages caused us to change the emphasis of our program from the two-fluid to the one-fluid breeder; most of our design and development effort is now directed to the one-fluid system.

The design study of the 300 megawatt demonstration reactor plant was completed. The internal structure of the reactor was developed in considerable detail. Special attention was given to methods for fabrication and assembly of the different graphite pieces. Hydraulic conditions in the reactor were analyzed and temperatures of graphite were calculated. Cooling equipment was added to the cell atmosphere circulation systems that had been provided for heating the reactor equipment cells.

Design studies on the molten salt breeder experiment core were continued, with emphasis on the design of a slab-type graphite element. Layout studies of the core include provisions for four cruciform-shaped control rods.

A computer program (BUBBLE) has been written to describe in detail the behavior of gas bubbles circulating with the salt through the molten salt breeder reactor primary system. This program is being incorporated into an overall program to describe the detailed behavior of noble gases in an molten salt breeder reactor.

In connection with the preparation of specifications for molten salt reactor pumps, we calculated the amount of energy deposited in various parts of a typical molten salt reactor pump by beta and gamma rays from fission products in the salt and in the cover gas, as well as by neutrons and gammas from other parts of the primary salt loop.

The performance and pressure-drop testing of the gas system technology facility bubble separator design have been completed on the water test loop. The final design has a 44 inch separation length, a tapered casing, and gas removal from both the swirl and recovery hubs. This design has a suitably high removal efficiency of the small-diameter bubbles associated with the calcium chloride, test fluid and has a stable vortex under all normal operating conditions.

Analyses were started with the objective of idealizing the swirl-flow bubble separator to develop expressions which would be helpful in understanding the performance of this separator. The effect on removal efficiency of the bubble size distribution and the turbulent diffusion of bubbles away from the vortex cavity are included in the studies.

The analysis of data from an experimental array exposed in the molten salt reactor core shows that on paired metal and graphite surfaces, tellurium and molybdenum were deposited considerably more strongly on metal than on graphite. Niobium and ruthenium were less intensely deposited, favoring metal surfaces only moderately more than graphite. Such individual characteristics will have to be considered in anticipating their behavior under molten salt breeder reactor system conditions.

Deuterium permeation through Hastelloy Nickel has been measured over the pressure range from 30 torr down to less than 1072 torr. Although earlier workers have uniformly reported variance from a dependence as the 14, power of pressure at pressures below 10 to 100 torr, no such departure was found in the present work. Accordingly, the extrapolations which have been used within molten salt reactor for calculation of tritium permeation appear correct.

Brazing experiments were continued to develop para- meters for back-brazing and sleeve-brazing operations. Portable heating equipment was developed that will enable us to field braze either inside the dry box or outside the dry box with local atmosphere protection of the heated area.

In preliminutesary tests of equipment for studying in- duction heating in molten salt as a potential heat source for nonradioactive tests of a frozen-wall fluorinator, arcing between the coil and the vessel partially melted the induction coil. Although the arcing was attributed to the use of argon as the inert cover gas, it prompted reexaminutesation of autoresistance heating for the internal heat source. In autoresistance heating tests with a fluorinator mockup, the desired mode of operation was not achieved because the frozen salt layers formed with low heat fluxes were not solid and hence were not electrically insulating. Higher heat fluxes are needed in order to obtain a lower wall temperature, and a large temperature gradient is required to suppress dendrite formation in order to produce a solid, electrically insulating frozen layer.

Design of the components for the processing materials test stand and the molybdenum reductive extraction equipment was continued, and fabrication of some of the structural parts of the test stand was started. Specific accomplishments include: design of the expansion loops in the molybdenum tubing; completion of the preliminutesary piping drawings and the construction of a full-scale mockup of the loop; design of the molybdenum equipment support system; design of a field assembly jig and a handling system so that the loop can be field assembled in a horizontal position and transported to the point of operation, where it will be erected to the vertical position; and design of the containment vessel, the seal-welded flange, the freeze valves, and the transition joint nozzles.

An eddy-current type of detector is being developed to allow detection and control of the bismuth-salt interface in salt-metal extraction columns or mechani- cally agitated salt-bismuth contactors. The probe con- sists of a ceramic form on which bifilar primary and secondary coils are wound. The ceramic form is placed inside a molybdenum tube in order to protect the coils from attack by salt or bismuth. A high-frequency alternating current, which is passed through the primary coil, induces a secondary coil current having an ampli- tude and a phase shift that are dependent on the conductivities of the materials adjacent to the coils. In tests of the probe at 550 to 700 degrees Celsius by the phase shift technique, the measurements were found to correlate quite satisfactorily with the bismuth level around the probe. The temperature dependence of the indicated level varies from 0.003 degrees Celsius at the upper end of the probe to 0.009 degrees Celsius at the lower end. It appears that the probe is a sensitive and practical indicator for determinutesing the bismuth level or for locating the salt-bismuth interface.

The design studies serve to define the needs for new or improved equipment, systems, and data for use in the design of future molten-sait reactors. The purpose of the reactor development program is to satisfy some of those needs. Presently the effort is concerned largely with providing solutions to the major problems of the secondary system and of removing xenon and handling the radioactive off-gases from the primary system. The design is nearing completion for the gas system tech- nology facility for use in testing the features and models of equipment for the gaseous fission product removal and off-gas systems and for making special studies of the chemistry of the fuel salt. Construction is well along on the coolant system technology facility for use in studies of equipment, processes, and chemistry of sodium fluoroborate for the secondary system of a molten-salt reactor.

The chemical processing cell is heated to prevent salt freezing. It is of a modular design for replacement of equipment by remote techniques. The upper level contains process equipment; the lower level contains drains and storage tanks. The cooling system uses NaK and is independent of other cooling systems in the reactor building.

A digital computer program, BUBBLE, has been written describing in detail the behavior of the gas bubbles circulating with the salt through the molten salt breeder reactor primary salt system. This program is now being incorporated into a larger digital computer program describing the detailed behavior of the noble gas in the molten salt breeder reactor. The intent of this effort is to either confirm the results of the simplified calculations describing the noble-gas behavior in the molten salt breeder reactor or to make improvements where required.

In the BUBBLE program it is assumed that the number of bubbles per unit salt volume and the sum of the gas dissolved in the salt and present in the bubbles per unit salt volume are constant throughout the salt loop (with the exception of the small volume of salt between the gas separator and the bubble generator). It is assumed also that the bubble size distribution at any location within the salt loop is described by the distribution function given by the volume-to-surface mean diameter. Since the Kress correlation for this flow regime applies to most parts of the molten salt breeder reactor primary salt system and since by definition the bubble surface area is inversely proportional to the volume-to-surface mean diameter, the gas transport rate is essentially constant for a given bubble void fraction.

With the number of bubbles per unit salt volume held constant, increasing the void fraction increases the mean diameter of the bubbles, the surface area, and the mass transfer coefficient. This results in large increases in the gas transport rate to the bubbles. Also, significant variations in the transport rates occur throughout the primary salt loop as a result of differences in temperature that affect the mass transfer coefficients and differences in temperature and pressure that affect the mean bubble diameter.

The first flux ratio is the fine heterogeneity factor; the second, the gross heterogeneity factor. Existing treatments assume separability of the two factors, that is, that they can be approximated by evaluating the fine heterogeneity factor for an infinite medium of grainy rod material, then using cross sections disadvantaged by this factor in a smeared-fine-structure representation of the rod in evaluating the gross heterogeneity factor.  Several different prescriptions have been proposed for the fine heterogeneity factor. The gross factor is usually obtained by the Nordheim integral treatment (NIT), using codes such as GAM-II and GAROL.

We have developed a method that is similar in principle to the others in that we assume separability, but we obtain both factors by NIT calculations. The GAM-II part of the XSDRN® code was suitably revised to perform a double NIT treatment, making two successive passes (treating fine and coarse hetero- geneity) through the fine energy mesh of each reso- nance. Also, the GAM-II equations were modified to yield, at each energy, a moderator-region flux that agrees with that obtainable by the GAROL code, which solves explicitly for the neutron collision densities and thus avoids some of the approximations in GAM-II.

Some preliminutesary calculations were performed to estimate the amount of radiation heating in the tank of an molten salt breeder reactor pump. Since this problem is common to all molten-salt systems, the reference-design molten salt breeder reactor was chosen to represent the entire class because the heating there will be greater than in lower-performance systems. In anticipation of the need to provide cooling for metal surfaces, a pump tank design was proposed with cooling shrouds that direct a flow of fuel salt over those surfaces. Since such provisions would affect the heat production in the structural members, estimates were made both with and without the shrouds in place.

The radiation that heats an molten salt reactor pump tank comes from several sources. One of the more conspicuous is the source associated with the noble gases and their daughters in the gas space above the salt pool. For molten-salt pumps of the type being considered, it is estimated that a salt flow of 50 gallons per minute will enter the tank as leakage around the drive shaft and other seals, bringing with it noble gases at the same concentrations as those circulating in the loop. These gases were assumed to escape into the gas space and to eventually be swept out by the purge flow of gas that enters around the pump shaft. In the case where no cooling of the tank was assumed, the seal leakage was the only noble-gas source considered. Pump tank cooling could, no doubt, be accomplished in a variety of ways, but one convenient salt source is the return flow from the drain tank. This stream would amount to about 110 gallons per minute per pump in an molten salt breeder reactor, and at least part of the salt would have previously been stripped of gaseous fission products in the drain tank. To provide a basis for calculations, this stream was assumed to flow into the pump bowl with complete release of the gaseous fission products to the gas space.

The second major source of radiation in the pump tank is the salt pool in the surge volume, which was assumed to be 10 feet. The intensity of this source was estimated from the rate of throughput and the ages of the various streams entering the pump for the two situations described above.

A third, but much smaller, source of radiation heating is the gamma and neutron shine on the pump tank from other components,primarily the reactor vessel, in the primary loop. Previously reported heating rates were used to estimate the contribution from this effect.

The heating effectiveness of the sources inside the pump tank is strongly influenced by the presence or absence of the cooling-salt layer and the shroud required to direct the flow over the tank surfaces. With no cooling, we assumed that all the radiation from the gas space was directly incident on the surrounding surfaces, so that beta, as well as gamma, heat was deposited in the tank walls. In addition, we assumed that all daughters formed by noble-gas decay would deposit on the tank walls and contribute to the heat source. With salt cooling, the tank wall was presumed to be completely shielded from the beta radiation emitted by the noble gases and their daughters. However, an additional gamma source from the cooling salt itself had to be considered. The shielding provided by the shroud and cooling salt was neglected in estimating the heating due to gamma radiation.

The mechanical design of the CSTF is complete, and the instrument and controls design is 90% complete. The control panel drawings have been approved for construction, and panel fabrication is 30% complete. The electrical drawings are 95% complete. The photo- graph in Fig. 3.5 shows the major components of the CSTF, which is being constructed in the existing enclosure of the old PKP-1 pump test stand. With the exception of the drain line, freeze valve, and drain tank, installation of the salt-wetted components into the facility is complete. The drain tank was fabricated earlier and was sent to the Reactor Chemistry Division for salt purification and loading activity while the construction of the facility was continued. The re- maining construction activity includes installation of thermocouples, preheaters, the cover-gas and off-gas lines, and the electrical and gas control equipment.

A variable port to throttle salt flow was installed in the inlet line within the salt monitoring vessel. The throttle can be operated through a slip seal in the gas space at the top of the vessel. Water flow tests of this unit before installation indicated satisfactory flow control at representative pressure differentials.

Detailed assembly procedures were prepared for the molten salt reactorE coolant pump and the Mark 2 prototype salt pump. The checklist format of the procedures ensures the documentation of quality assurance during pump assembly. Report forms were prepared for leak testing, cleaning, dynamic balancing, critical speed measure- ment, and force-deflection measurements for the shaft.