Design studies were continued on the 300 Mega Watts molten salt demonstration reactor. The core graphite was changed to slab shapes, about 1 and 7/8 inch by 9 and 3/4 inch by 21 feet long. The slabs are held in place by graphite posts which maintain the core configuration yet permit movement to accommodate temperature and radiation effects. Salt which reaches the drain tank by entrainment in the gas effluent from the gas separator is now returned to the primary circulation system by two jet pumps located in a cluster in the drain tank. The jets are actuated by salt flows from the primary pumps and are arranged to prevent pumpback of gas into the primary loops. The manifolds that connect the Sodium–Potassium cooling circuit thimbles in the drain tank have been rearranged to facilitate maintenance, and three water tanks for heat rejection are now provided instead of one. Seismic effects on the drain tank and its cooling system have received preliminary study. A basin has been provided in the drain tank cell to catch accidental salt spills from the salt lines or valves and to drain it into the fuel-salt drain tank.

A study was made of the consequences of the mixing of fuel and coolant salts as a result of various modes of failure of tubing in the primary heat exchangers in the molten salt breeder reactor reference design. Four specific cases were ex- amined: (1) doubled-ended failure near the fuel-salt outlet; (2) double-ended failure near the fuel salt inlet; (3) small coolant-salt leak into the primary system; (4) small fuel-salt leak into the secondary system.  The study is, in many places, speculative both because of the preliminary status of the design and the lack of adequate physicochemical data on mixing of fuel and coolant salts. However unpleasant some of the consequences of tubing failure may be, no way of generating either a nuclear excursion or a rupture in the primary or secondary loop piping is foreseen.

The incentives for side-stream processing of the molten salt breeder reactor fuel salt for iodine and/or xenon removal as an alternative means for dealing with the Xenon-135 poison level are being examined. Iodine stripping would require only small bypass flow rates, approximately 225 gallons per minute sufficing to reduce Xenon-135 poison level to less than 1 percent in a 100 percent efficient stripper. Analysis of laboratory sparging experiments indicates only negligible movement of iodine as hydrogen iodide into the graphite. Combined xenon and iodine strippers appear to be a reasonable development goal and a highly attractive means for achieving 0.5% poison level with uncoated graphite.

Design studies on the molten salt breeder experiment were continued with emphasis on the core heat removal and core maintenance. Both prismatic and slab-type graphite elements were considered. Maintenance studies were also conducted on repair of a leak in the primary heat exchanger.

A subcontract between ORNL and the Ebasco Ser- vices Group, consisting of Ebasco, Babcock and Wilcox, Byron Jackson, Cabot, Conoco, and Union Carbide companies, was negotiated and signed. This industrial group will conduct a design study of a 1000-Mega Watt molten salt breeder reactor plant. They have essentially completed the selection of a reference conceptual design for further study and evaluation.

During the report period we completed and issued a report describing the Reactor Optimum Design Code, with instructions for its use. The code package has been furnished to the Argonne Code Center, where it is available upon request.

Since the Hastelloy Nickel in the fuel system of an molten salt breeder reactor should last for the life of the plant, we have calculated the radiation damage caused by delayed neutrons emitted outside the core and by leakage neutrons from the core. Results indicate that helium production,primarily from Boron-10 reactions, would be the most important source of damage (assuming an initial Boron-10 concentration of 2 parts per million). The lifetime helium production in the heat exchanger due to delayed neutrons would be less than 2 parts per billion with Sodium tetrafluoroborate and Sodium fluoride coolant salt, or close to 50 parts per billion with a chemical containing 2 Lithium, 1 Beryllium, and 4 Fluorines, enriched to 99.995% in the Lithium-7 isotope. In the reactor outlet line, the terminal helium concentration would be less than 10 parts per billion from the delayed neutron source. Rather larger amounts of helium could be produced by core-leakage neutrons in parts of the heat exchangers or piping directly facing the reactor vessel. For our present reference design, the maximum amount of helium could approach 1 parts per million, primarily from Nickel-8 reactions.

We calculated various reactivity coefficients for the molten salt breeder experiment and compared them with values for our reference molten salt breeder reactor. The most noteworthy differences are a positive fuel-salt density coefficient for the molten salt breeder experiment (negative for the molten salt breeder reactor) and the negative graphite temperature coefficient for the molten salt breeder experiment (positive for the molten salt breeder reactor). Both of these differences are associated with a greater neutron leakage from the smaller molten salt breeder experiment, and result in a much more negative overall temperature coefficient.

Investigation of batch fuel cycles for fixed-moderator molten-salt reactors has been continued. We have found that reactor lifetime-averaged reaction-rate coefficients are adequate for calculating the time-dependent fuel composition throughout the lifetime for enriched uranium-fueled reactors, but only for the asymptotic portion of the lifetime for recycled-plutoniim-fueled reactors. Reaction coefficients calculated specifically for the beginning of the lifetime are required for plutonium calculations, because the amounts of plutonium in the system at startup are sufficient to cause significant hardening of the neutron spectrum. Calculations with plutonium feed are continuing.

Results are presented for a reactor designed as a breeder (with continuous processing) but operated as a converter, with enriched-uranium feed and batch processing in four cycles over the lifetime of the reactor. An average conversion ratio greater than 90% and a fuel cost, excluding processing, of about 0.76 mills per kilowatthour were found for this reactor.

Tests on the molten salt breeder experiment-scale bubble separator were continued in the water loop to study the formation of the very fine bubbles encountered with the water-glycerol test fluid and to evaluate the separator performance with these small bubbles. These tests showed that the production of the small bubbles is influenced mostly by the pump head and speed. Dilution tests run with Calcium chloride solution showed a very sharp increase in separator efficiency as the concentration approached 2.7 weight percent, probably the point at which significant bubble coalescence began. Such a threshold at a lower concentration has been discussed in the recent literature. Attempts to increase the vortex to the length needed to separate gas from the higher viscosity fluids led to an instability when the gas flowed at the rates needed. However, removal of the core from the annular recovery hub resulted in satisfactory vortex stability over the full gas flow range. A test is being planned to compare the bubble formation and coalescence properties of molten salt with those of demineralized water and other solutions.

The conceptual system design description and the quality assurance plan for the molten-salt loop for testing gas systems were completed, and the design is proceeding.

A report is being written on the design bases for molten-salt reactor off-gas systems.

The development of a computer program for the design of charcoal beds for MSR off-gas systems was started. The plan is to develop a new program by revising and expanding existing programs. The existing programs provide necessary information, but they are not arranged to be of maximum usefulness to the designer.

Foster Wheeler Corporation was chosen as the company to perform the conceptual design study of the steam generator for use with molten-salt reactors. The scope of work finally included in the request for proposal package differed from that reported previously. The changes basically limit the industrial firm to work on the steam generator and exclude the systems design work originally requested.

Work continued on the preparation of a conceptual system design description for the steam generator technology facility. This facility would be a side loop of the coolant-salt technology facility and would be used to study transients and steady-state operation of some full- and part-length tube test sections of a molten-salt steam generator. A study was made of the configurations which could be used in the SGTF and the larger steam generator tube test stand. It was found that only the one quarter and three eighths inch diameter steam tubes could be tested in the 150-kiloWatt steam generator technology facility at full length and that larger tubes could be tested only under limited inlet and outlet conditions.

However, multiple tubes and tubes up to about 1 inch in diameter could be tested in the steam generator tube test stnad.

The PKP pump rotary element was disassembled, and the component parts were visually examined. Except for the inner heat baffle plates, the appearance of the Inconel metal surfaces indicated insignificant corrosive attack. The inner heat baffle plates were severely attacked, and this effect was attributed to the formation of corrosive products by reaction of moisture in the incoming purge gas with puddles of Sodium tetrafluoroborate salt which were present on the heat baffle plates as a result of ingassing transients.

The mechanical design of the coolant-salt technology facility is nearing completion. The design now includes the corrosion product trap for studying the deposition of corrosion products and the on-line monitoring station for studying the electrochemical and surface properties of the salt. The parts of the molten salt reactor experiment to be used in the construction have been removed and cleaned in preparation for assembly. Fabrication of the drain tank and the specimen surveillance station was completed. Fabrication of the corrosion product trap and the on-line monitoring station was started.

The pump requirements for the coolant salt technology facility and the testing gas systems were reviewed, and a plan for adapting the pumps from the MSRE program was developed. It was found desirable to alter the MSRE Mark II pump by use of available equipment to provide additional head.

After making temporary repairs to the ALPHA pump, it was installed in the MSR-FCL-2 test facility and is being operated at test program design conditions.

A study of a particular jet pump system (two pumps in series) for returning fuel salt from the drain tank to the fuel-salt system in a Molten-Salt Demonstration Reactor indicated that the system was hydraulically suitable for the application.

The influence of the magnitude of the temperature coefficient of viscosity on the variation of the heat transfer coefficient along a tube has been determined with and without a hydrodynamic (un-heated) entrance, using a proposed molten salt breeder reactor fuel salt as the working fluid. Experiments were performed at two temperatures, 1450 and 1100 degrees Fahrenheit, for which the temperature coefficients of viscosity differ by a factor of 4, the higher coefficient corresponding to the lower temperature. Results indicate that, in the transitional flow regime of these experiments (Reynolds modulus 3000 to 4000), increasing the negative temperature coefficient by decreasing the average temperature re- sults in a reduction in the heat transfer coefficient near the exit of the heated length (120 L/D) for operation without a hydrodynamic entrance region. The influence of temperature for operation with an entrance region was found not to be significant beyond L/D of about 40. The observed influence of temperature on heat transfer development is attributed to the stabilizing effect of heating for the case of a fluid whose negative temperature coefficient of viscosity is relatively large.

New measurements have been made of thermal conductivity of the mixture lithium fluoride and beryllium fluoride, (66-34 mole %) over the range 300 to 870 degrees Celsius using an improved variable-gap apparatus capable of plus or minus 10% or better accuracy. These new results suggest that the temperature dependency of thermal conductivity for this mixture is smaller than previous measurements had indicated. The ratio of the thermal conductivity of the liquid to that of the solid was determined to be around 0.75.

Mass transfer coefficients have been measured and correlated for helium bubbles (mean diameter from 0.015 to 0.05 inch) extracting dissolved oxygen from glycerol-water mix- tures (Schmidt modulus range from 419 to 3446) over a Reynolds modulus range from 8100 to 160000 for both horizontal and vertical flow. At sufficiently high flow, the horizontal and vertical results are equivalent and are correlated in terms of the dimensionless Sherwood, Reynolds, and Schmidt moduli and the ratio of bubble to pipe diameter.

A criterion for predicting the condition for equivalence is presented; and use is made of the criterion as a scaling factor to correlate the mass transfer coefficients in vertical flow in the transitional region between turbulence-dominated and quiescent bubble rise situations.

Examination of specimens from the mist shield of the molten salt reactor experiment pump bowl, a rod from the sampler cage in the pump bowl, and rings from the control rod thimble that had restricted salt flow showed that all components had intergranular cracks when strained. Two samples from in-pile loop 2 were strained, and some shallow cracks were formed in both samples. Thus, all metal surfaces exposed to the fuel salt have intergranular cracks. Fission products on graphite spedimens were measured by two techniques. Significant quantities of elements from the Hastelloy Nickel and fission products were observed by both techniques.

 A study was completed in which the capital and operating costs were determined for a plant that processes the fuel salt from a 1000-Megawatt molten salt breeder reactor on a ten-day cycle. The processing plant is based on the reference flowsheet that uses fluorination for uranium removal, reductive extraction for protactinium removal, and metal transfer for rare-earth removal. The latest version of the flowsheet incorporates an improved method for recovering Uranium Hexafluoride from the fluorinator off-gas and a method for recycling fluorine, hydrogen, and hydrogen fluoride in the plant in order to minimize the quantity of radioactive waste produced.

In preparing the cost estimate, preliminary designs were made for all major process equipment items, and the costs of piping, instrumentation, and certain auxiliary items were determined by using appropriate percentages of the costs of the fabricated equipment items. The total direct and indirect costs for the plant are $20.6 and $15 million respectively. Thus, a total plant investment of $35.6 million is required. The resulting net fuel cycle cost (1.12 mills per kilowatthour) is composed largely of fixed charges on the processing plant (0.7 mills per kilowatthour), inventory charges on salt and fissile materials in the reactor and Protactinium-233 in the processing plant (0.42 mills per kilowatthour), and processing plant operating charges (0.083 mills per kilowatthour); credit is taken for excess fissile material produced (0.089 mills per kilowatthour). A 0.28 power dependence of processing plant cost on process- ing rate was estimated; this indicates that a considerable saving in processing cost could be achieved by using a processing plant with a larger power generation capacity than 1000 Megawatt.

Capital and operating costs were calculated for two methods for obtaining and disposing of hydrogen, hydrogen fluoride, and fluorine in a processing plant. The first method, purchase and disposal of the gases after one cycle through the process, requires large amounts of Fluorine, Hydrogen, and Hydrogen Fluoride gases to be purchased and a large amount of radioactive waste to be generated. The second method, collection of the Hydrogen Fluoride and Hydrogen, and production of additional Hydrogen, and Fluoride, for recycle by electrolysis of the Hydrogen Fluoride, requires the purchase of only small amounts of HF and Hydrogen, and produces only a small quantity of radioactive waste. Contributions to the fuel cycle cost for the once-through case and the recycle case are 0.11 and 0.024 mills per kilowatthour respectively. The recycle case was adopted for use in the processing plant.

Calculations were made of the thermal power that will be produced in an molten salt breeder reactor processing plant by the decay of noble-metal fission products as a function of the residence time of these materials in the primary reactor system and of the fraction of the materials accompanying the fuel salt to the processing plant. A heat generation rate of 200 kilowatt will result if 1% of the noble metals reach the processing plant in the case of a l minute holdup time, or if 20% reach the processing plant in the case of a ten-day holdup time. Calculations were also made of the heat generation rate resulting from decay of the halogen fission products in the processing plant as a function of the halogen and the noble-metal removal times. The heat generation rate will be 210 kilowatt for a halogen removal time of ten days if the noble- metal holdup time in the reactor is 0.1 day.  Calculations were made of the long-term hazard of high-level radioactive wastes produced in the three nuclear fission fuel cycles under development. Several aspects of the molten salt breeder reactor fuel cycle related to waste disposal problems are considered.

A survey was made of published data on the availability of and future demand for natural resources required for an molten salt breeder reactor power economy. Consideration is given to the possible impact on the molten salt breeder reactor concept of the depletion of world reserves of natural resources required by molten-salt breeder reactors.

Contamination was found to be the reason for the occasional high iron concentrations reported for salt samples from previous experiments. This contamination apparently occurred during removal of salt from the nickel samplers. To eliminate this problem, the sampler design was modified, and copper was used as the material of construction. Five iron fluoride reduction runs were made with iron concentrations of about 700 to 900 parts per million. The gas flow rates used in these runs were only about 20% of previous values since the packed column had become partially restricted. After the runs had been completed, the column was removed and cut into sections for examination. A heavy deposit of nickel and a near-uniform deposit of iron were noted on the packing. A column of slightly modified design has been fabricated and installed.