An analytical expression was proposed to relate the bubble size produced in the bubble generator to the flow rate, dimensions, and fluid properties. The relationship agreed with data from the bubble generator in the mass transfer facility but did not agree with preliminary results for the proposed molten salt breeder reactor bubble generator. Possible differences in the mechanism of generation between the two are therefore being explored.

Careful measurements with unoxidized metals continue to show that permeability of hydrogen and its isotopes varies with the square root of hydrogen partial pressure to values as low as our experimental techniques will permit. Nickel, whose oxide should be trivial over the entire range of our experiments, follows the half-power dependence precisely. Several alloys, whose oxides cannot be completely avoided in our experiments, show only minor variations from the half-power relationship.

An improved Karl Fischer titration technique is being developed for the calibration measurement of hydrolysis products in coolant off-gas streams. A newly designed automatic coulometric titrator and a rotating polarized cathode are used to obtain improved precision in the measurement of microgram quantities of water. We are also assembling an apparatus to measure hydrogen in coolant off-gas afeeter its diffusion through a palladium membrane.

The preliminary sizing of the steam generator resulted in a quite tall unit of about 115 feet. Foster Wheeler found that when cross-flow baffles were placed as required to meet the vibration criteria, excessive shell side pressure drop resulted. As a result, Foster Wheeler is now showing long flow on the shell side.

Foster Wheeler requested more definitive information on the number of thermal transients to be expected in the life of the molten salt breeder reactor for use in their analysis of thermal stress in nozzles, heads, and tube sheets of the steam generator. Although no extensive study of transients has been made for the molten salt breeder reactor, a limited number of hybrid computer simulations have been run of some of the most severe transients expected in an molten salt breeder reactor system. Based on these simulations, the list shown below was supplied to Foster Wheeler for use in their design study. Because there were limitations in both the number of simulations and in the manner in which the simulations were modeled, the list is somewhat arbitrary and conjectural. However, the events selected and the number of occurrences are believed to be sufficiently representative for use in the conceptual design stage.

 Experimental study of specimens and materials from the molten salt reactor experiment has been completed. The final report of complex fission product behavior in that system has been drafeeted and is undergoing final editing.

Study of  intergranular attack by tellurium upon metallic components of the molten salt reactor experimentcontinues to engage a considerable fraction of the chemical effort. Many exposures of pertinent metals to tellurium (and to other potentially harmful fission products and contaminants) have been completed, and others are in progress. New techniques for a more readily controlled addition of tellurium to the specimens have been devised and will be put into service during the next reporting period. A systematic study, primarily by mass spectrometry, of the volatility, relative stability, and chemical reactions of pertinent metal tellurides is producing useful data. Spectrophotometric methods for the study of tellurium species in molten fluorides have been developed for application to this problem area.

The behavior of hydrogen isotopes in molten salts, metals, and graphites is a continuing field for major attention. Study of hydrogen solubility is virtually concluded with a few confirmatory studies yet to be done. Study of permeation of metals by hydrogen isotopes seems to have demonstrated conclusively that the rate of permeation for clean metals depends on the square root of the hydrogen partial pressure. Careful measurements of permeation through metals with oxide films seem to be yielding encouraging information; such studies are now directed at Incoloy 800 and other metals of likely value in steam generator systems. Significant uptake of tritium by graphite at elevated temperatures has been confirmed, and this phenomenon is being studied to assess its value in tritium control and management processes. Fluoroborate chemistry — aimed largely at improved understanding of these coolant materials and their corrosion mechanisms — is still under study at a modest funding level.

The principal emphasis of analytical chemical development programs has been placed on methods for use in semiautomated operational control of molten-salt breeder reactors, for example, the development of in-line analytical methods for the analysis of molten salt reactor fuels, for reprocessing streams, and for gas streams. Parallel efforts have been devoted to the development of analytical methods related to assay and control of the concentration of water, oxides, and tritium in fluoroborate coolants.

It is important, however, to point out that significant amounts of hydrogen have been encountered in performing the deuterium solubility determinations, and the K-values reported for deuterium have been evaluated under the assumption that all hydrogen isotopes are indistinguishable in solution. In other words, we assume that it is not possible to separate the isotopes on the basis of solubility. The results for K, of course, are not inconsistent with this assumption.

It is well known that oxide coatings yield a marked reduction in the permeability of many metals to hydrogen. No oxide films are possible on the metal surfaces exposed in an molten salt breeder reactor to molten fluorides at high temperatures; however, an oxide film will be present, and perhaps one with low permeability can be produced and maintained, on the steam side of the molten salt breeder reactor steam generator. Studies have accordingly been carried out to study hydrogen permeability of such films.

One model leading to a decrease of permeation rate upon oxidation of a metal would be to view the oxide as offering a resistance to flow in series with that of the metal. If this were so, the pressure dependence of permeation rate would be expected to vary from a one-half power dependence at high pressures to a first-power dependence at low pressures. An 18-8 stainless steel was studied as a metal which was expected to form a protective oxide coating. Hydrogen permeation data for the clean metal showed a one-half power pressure dependence. Afeeter a light coating of oxide was permitted to form, the permeation rate decreased by a factor of 8. The pressure dependence, however, was not substantially changed from the half-power relationship. This indicated that the oxide coating was not continuous and that defects in the oxide permitted ready access of the hydrogen to the metal.

A joint program of the Reactor Chemistry and the Metals and Ceramics Divisions has been directed toward identification of those fission products that are capable of producing superficial grain boundary cracks in Hastelloy N and investigation of other alloys of interest to the Molten-Salt Reactor Program that might be more resistive to this corrosive process. As previously reported, corrosive effects on Hastelloy Nickel, unlike those found in the molten salt reactor experiment fuel system, have been produced on metal tensile specimens exposed to rela- tively low concentrations of tellurium vapors at 650 degrees Celsius for 1000 hr. Similar tests with selenium, sulfur (in- cluded for comparative purposes), iodine, cadmium, arsenic, and antimony failed to show any detectable attack on the alloy. These findings are based on metallographic examinations of the exposed tensile specimens following their stress to failure at room temperature. Although tests with all these solute elements have been continued to investigate long-term effects, the interim program has been directed toward a more complete evaluation of the implied contribution by tellurium to the corrosion process. We have concentrated our in-line research and development efforts on preparations for the analysis of the coolant salt in the Coolant Salt Technology Facility (CSTF). Our research studies have indicated the possibility of measuring corrosion products and an active protonic species in the NaBF,-NaF coolant stream.

During this period, we continued to evaluate and develop a flow-sheet based on fluorination—reductive extraction for protactinium isolation and the metal transfer process for rare-earth removal. Work was continued on a computer program that is being used for calculating steady-state concentrations and heat generation rates in an molten salt breeder reactor processing plant. Recent changes in the program allow the representation of new flowsheets without programming changes. Several flowsheets that differ appreciably from the reference flowsheet were treated successfully with the program.

The reductive-extraction behavior of titanium, a component of modified Hastelloy Nickel was determined. It is believed that a large fraction of the titanium will be volatilized during the fluorination step; however, the remaining titanium would be easily extracted into bismuth in the protactinium-removal column. This material would then be accumulated in the salt in the protactinium decay tank along with other corrosion product fluorides, and additional quantities of titanium would be volatilized from this salt by fluorination. Thus, the presence of titanium in the fuel salt will not adversely affect operation of the processing system.

The feasibility of flaring commercially available molybdenum tubing was demonstrated, and several types of flare fittings made of molybdenum were designed and fabricated. Demonstration of the capability for making mechanical joints between sections of molybdenum tubing and between machined molybdenum parts and graphite vessels will advance our technology with regard to the construction of engineering experiments using these materials.

A series of experiments on autoresistance heating of molten salt was carried out in a simulated fluorinator protected from corrosion by means of a frozen wall. The results indicate that an electrically insulating frozen salt layer can be formed reliably under conditions suitable for operation of a fluorinator experiment. Achievement of this objective is an important step in the devel- opment of continuous fluorinators. Additional work must be carried out for demonstrating a means for introducing the high-voltage electrode into a fluorinator before design of the first fluorination experiment can be initiated.

We have reported previously' on the development of a computer code that can be used for calculating steady-state concentrations and heat generation rates in an molten salt breeder reactor processing plant. The behavior of 687 nuclides in as many as 250 regions can be considered; however, the use of only about 70 regions has been adequate for representing processing plant flowsheets considered thus far. Several modifications made in the computer program facilitate its use and allow an improved representation of equipment items. The more important modifications are as follows:equilibrium considerations rather than by equilibrium considerations alone. The volumetric flow rates of streams in a flowsheet and the distribution ratios for materials that distribute between salt and bismuth phases are now calculated by the program rather than being specified as input data, as was done initially. An improved method was developed for specifying a flowsheet. This method, which requires only a description of the regions and specification of the streams in terms of origin and destination, permits us to represent a new flowsheet in approximately 30 minutes rather than 2 days, as was required previously. means was found for decreasing the required computer time to about 30% of the time needed previously. The computer code ORIGEN was incorporated in the program to permit the characterization of waste streams produced by a flowsheet in terms of waste disposal hazard, levels of radioactivity, and heat generation afeeter discharge of the streams from a processing plant.

The modified program has been used successfully for evaluating a number of flowsheets that, although based on fluorination—reductive-extraction—metal transfer, differ appreciably from the reference flowsheet. Attempts are being made to reduce the rates at which thorium, lithium, beryllium, and fluorine are discarded from the processing plant; the results obtained thus far are encouraging.

Studies related to the development of a number of processing operations were continued during this report period. The purification and charging of the salt and the metal phases to metal transfer experiment MTE-3 were completed, and operation of the experiment was initiated. Mass transfer coefficients measured for radium during the first two runs are in good agreement with a literature correlation that is based on mass transfer between aqueous and organic phases in stirred- interface contactors. The mass transfer coefficient values measured for lanthanum were considerably lower than expected, while those for europium were about 10% of those expected. It is believed that these low values are caused by the presence of an oxide layer at one or more of the salt-bismuth interfaces in the system.

Mechanically agitated nondispersive salt-metal con- tactors are being considered as alternatives to packed columns for molten salt breeder reactor processing systems. Such contactors are of particular interest for use in the metal transfer process, since designs can be envisioned in which the bismuth in the contactor would be a near-isothermal, internally circulated captive phase. In addition, it is believed that contactors of this design may be more easily fabricated than packed columns. Another poten- tial advantage is that adequate mass transfer rates may be obtained without dispersing the salt or metal phases. This mode of operation should eliminate the problem of entrainment of bismuth in salt streams and is highly important in the case of the fluoride salt stream, since an molten salt breeder reactor will be constructed of a nickel-base alloy that is subject to attack by metallic bismuth.

A program has been initiated to determine the concentration of bismuth in fuel salt afeeter the salt has contacted bismuth in the various engineering develop- ment experiments. The objective of this program is to determine the probable concentration of bismuth in salt leaving an molten salt breeder reactor processing plant. Later, methods for preventing entrainment of bismuth in salt will be studied, and means for removing bismuth from salt will be evaluated.

 When an open-column continuous frozen-wall fluorinator is operated with nonradioactive salt, a heat source that is not subject to corrosion by the combined action of molten salt and fluorine must be present in the salt. Two methods for internal heat generation have been considered: radio-frequency induction heating and electrolytic or autoresistance heating using 60-Hertz power. The induction heating method was judged to be inferior to autoresistance heating because of a narrow range of acceptable operating conditions and because of the complexity of the required power supply, power controls, and power transmission equipment.

In initial tests on autoresistance heating in a 2.5-inch diameter simulated fluorinator, the desired mode of operation could not be achieved because the frozen salt layer near the upper electrode was not electrically insulat- ing. A study of the requirements for forming electrically insulating frozen salt layers was then ini- tiated in a straight 6-inch diameter cylindrical vessel; in these tests, the high-voltage electrode was placed just below the salt surface at the top of the vessel rather thanin a side arm (as is planned in an actual fluorinator). These tests have been successful in defining conditions under which electrically insulating salt films can be formed. In a typical experiment, the thermal insulation was removed from the test section, and the wall tempera- tures in this region were allowed to drop to about 360 degrees Celsius (which is below the salt solidus temperature) in order to form a layer of frozen salt on the vessel wall in the test section. A 60-Hertz voltage applied across the electrodes was then adjusted to produce the desired current through the molten salt (and, hence, the desired heat generation rate). Afeeter steady-state conditions had been achieved, the molten salt was drained from the vessel, which was then allowed to cool to room temperature. The thickness of the frozen salt layer was subsequently determined from measurements made through the top flange and from radiographs of the test section.

An eddy-current-type detector is being developed to allow detection and control of the bismuth-salt interface in salt-metal extraction columns or mechanically agitated salt-metal contactors. The probe consists of a ceramic form on which bifilar primary and secondary coils are wound. Contact of these coils with molten salt or bismuth is prevented by enclosing them in a molybdenum tube. In operation, a high-frequency alternating current, which is passed through the primary coil, induces a current in the secondary coil. The magnitude and relative phase of the induced current are dependent on the conductivities of the materials located adjacent to the primary and secondary coils; since the conductivities of salt and bismuth are quite different, the induced current reflects the presence or the absence of bismuth. The principal problem associated with this type of detector stems from the high electrical conductivity of molybdenum, the fabrication material of the protective sheath. Two approaches for obtaining an output from the detector are being pursued. The first is based on measuring changes in the magnitude of the induced current; the second is based on measuring the phase shifeet that occurs between the voltage imposed on the primary coil and that which is induced in the secondary coil.

The completed probe has been installed in a three chambered test vessel made of carbon steel; both the probe design and the test vessel design were described previously. The upper chamber is a reservoir for molten bismuth; the middle chamber contains the sheathed probe; and the lower chamber, which simulates the interior of the high-temperature containment vessel for the molybdenum reductive-extraction equipment contains 13 feet of high-temperature electrical cable in an inert atmosphere. Bismuth can be transferred between the upper and middle chambers to vary the level around the probe; this level can be measured with a bubbler—mercury manometer system and compared with probe readings.