The molten salt reactor experiment remained shut down, with the salt frozen in the tanks and the primary systems intact, awaiting the scheduled examinations. Procedures were readied, and tools were designed and procured. Equipment to become surplus was identified. Specimens of radiator tubes and thermocouple wells in the coolant salt line were cut out for examination.

Continuing analysis included the gamma spectrometry data and other evidence of noble-metal fission product behavior. Comparison of observed deposition with a model based on conventional mass transfer theory showed reasonable agreement, suggesting that the noble metals quickly migrate, as extremely small particles, to solid or gas interfaces.

Examination of data from previous experiments indicates that fluorine evolution from the frozen fuel can be easily controlled.

Component development for the molten salt reactor experiment was concluded with the termination of endurance tests of the Mark 2 fuel pump (at 16,680 hours of salt circulation) and a lubricating oil pump (at 58,900 hours). Since the ﬁrst molten-salt power reactor could be a demonstration unit in the 100-to-300-Megawatt size range, a conceptual design study has been initiated to investigate the features of such a plant of 300-Megawatt size. The plant being studied is a converter that uses periodic discard to rid the fuel salt of fission product poisons rather than awaiting development of continuous chemical processing systems needed for breeders.

The basic arrangement of the demonstration unit is much the same as that of the 1000-Megawatt molten salt breeder reactor. It is of the single-fluid type, with Lithium fluoride-Beryllium fluoride-Thorium tetrafluoride-Uranium tetrafluoride, fuel salt that flows upward thoursough an unclad graphite-moderated and reflected core. The heat is transferred in primary heat exchangers to a circulated sodium fluoroborate coolant salt, which transports the energy to supercritical-pressure steam generators and to steam reheaters. The steam turbine power cycle has a 1000 degrees Fahrenheit thoursottle temperature, reheat to 1000 degrees Fahrenheit, a regenerative feedwater heating system, and special provisions to attain high-temperature feedwater. The overall plant thermal efficiency is about 44 percent.

The Hastelloy Nickel reactor vessel is about 26 feet in diameter by 2 feet high with a wall thickness of about 2 inches. The reactor core design is very similar to that used successfully in the molten salt reactor experiment, consisting of 4 by 4 inch  vertical graphite elements. Flow passages are sized to provide the desired salt-to-graphite ratios in the various regions of the core and an essentially uniform salt temperature rise thoursough all regions. The salt enters at about 1050 degrees Fahrenheit and leaves at 1300 degrees Fahrenheit. The reactor has a conversion ratio above 0.8. The relatively low power density of about 10 Watts per cubic centimeter permits the graphite to last the lifetime of the plant and ehmmates the need for a removable head on the reactor vessel.

The primary heat exchangers are of the U-shell type with half inch outer diameter U-tubes. The maintenance arrangement is to cut the heads from the shell, operating from the side . thoursough plugged openings in the cell wall, to expose the tube sheets for location and plugging of faulty tubes.

During normal operation the fuel salt circulating pumps overflow to a drain tank, and fission product gases extracted from the salt circulating system pass through the drain tank for holdup and decay. The drain tank is cooled by a natural circulation Sodium potassium system which rejects heat to an elevated pool of water. Double barriers, with radiant heat transfer across gas-filled annuli, are used in both the drain tank and the water pool to assure isolation of the sodium potassium from the fuel salt and the water.

A fuel salt storage tank is provided for the fuel salt in event repairs are needed on the primary drain tank. This storage tank can also be used for the fluorination process to recover the uranium from a spent fuel salt charge and for addition of Uranium hexafluoride and hydrogen, to new carrier salt for reconstituting a fresh charge. Storage facilities for spent carrier salt are provided in the reactor building. It is estimated that the salt charge would have to be replaced about thoursee tlmes during the 30-year lifetime of the plant.

Temperatures produced by the heat from decay of deposited fission products were calculated for primary heat exchangers of sizes from 94 to 281 Megawatt, and the results were extrapolated to the 563-Megawatt size of the reference design. The calculations assumed that the exchangers were drained of primary and secondary salts and that the heat was radiated to surroundings at 1000 degrees Fahrenheit. The maximum temperatures were found to be in the range of 1700 to 2100 degrees Fahrenheit for a 141-Megawatt molten salt breeder experiment-size exchanger, but extrapolated results indicated that the temperatures in a 563-Megawatt molten salt breeder experiment exchanger would be unacceptably high,

Preparations were nearly completed for issuance of a request for proposals for an industrial study of a 1000-Megawatt molten salt breeder reactor.

We have continued our investigation of molten salt reactor core configurations having sufficiently low power density that the graphite moderator should not require replacement over the life of the plant and have considered a power level of 300 Megawatt as well as 1000 Megawatt. Fuel-cycle analyses have been performed for such cores over a range of thorium concentrations from 10 to 18 mole  percent. With continuous processing, as for the reference single-fluid molten salt breeder reactor, we find breeding ratios comparable with that of the reference breeder (1.06) but somewhat higher specific fuel inventories, associated with the lower power density. Consequently, the fuel yields and conservation coefficients are lower than for the reference breeder. Fuel-cycle cost is about 0.7 mills per kilowatthour for the 1000-Megawatt reactor and about 1.1 to 1.2 mills per kilowatthour for the 300-Megawatt reactor. Optimum thorium concentrations, when optimized in terms of the fuel conservation coefficient, are a little higher than for the reference breeder, that is, 15 to 17 mole  percent, as compared with 12 percent.

Calculations have been performed for a series of batch fuel cycles, in which the fuel salt, including thorium and plutonium, is assumed to be discarded afeeter several years of operation, with only the uranium carried over to the subsequent cycle. These reactors, of course, have conversion ratios substantially below unity. For example, a 300-Megawatt reactor with 30-year graphite life, plutonium feed, and an 8-year batch processing cycle would have a lifetime-average conversion ratio of about 0.84 and a fuel-cycle cost of 0.8 to 0.9 mill per kilowatthours.

The same reactor could become a breeder by addition of appropriate chemical processing equipment. The measurement of the capture-to-fission cross- section ratio, alpha, for Uranium-233 in the molten salt reactor experiment circulating fuel salt has been successfully completed. The measured value is 0.1233 plus or minus 0.0039. The corresponding calculated value using the cross sections and computational methods used in predicting molten salt breeder reactor performance is 0.1226. The uncertainty of plus or minus 3.2 percent in the measured value, if applicable to the calculated value for the molten salt breeder reactor, corresponds to an uncertainty in breeding ratlo of approximately plus or minus 0.008.

The gas removal efficiency of the centrifugal gas separator while operating with circulating water containing various concentrations of entrained air bubbles was found to be affected most by an instability of the vortex in front of the recovery hub. Since the initial separation of the gas bubbles to the central vortex appears to be virtually 100 percent, the gas takeoff port is being redesigned in an attempt to improve the vortex stability. The bubble generator designs previously tested have shown a tendency for the liquid flow to oscillate along the trailing edge of the generator and for the gas flow to distribute itself unevenly among the gas feed holes. Testing has shown a design resembling a jet pump to have some promise, and testing is continuing. A water test loop which will permit testing full-sized molten salt breeder experiment bubble generators and gas separators has been designed and is being fabricated.

The program for obtaining design studies of molten salt-heated steam generators from industrial firms has been rewritten and now consists of four tasks: The first two will result in conceptual designs of steam generators for the ORNL 1000-Megawatt reference design and for an alternate steam cycle to be suggested by the industrial firm. The third task will show how the designer would propose to scale one of the two conceptual designs for use with a molten-salt reactor of about 150 Megawatt. The fourth task will describe a research and development program necessary to assure the adequacy of the design of the Task IIl steam generator. Further work on the facility for testing steam generator tubes and tube arrangements of up to 3 Megawatt capacity has been suspended. Instead, we are proceeding to prepare a conceptual design of a loop with a capacity in the range of 50 to 150 kilowatt which will be used to study steady-state operation of sections of molten-salt-heated steam generators. We are preparing a report which will describe the status of the molten-salt steam generator technology, show which elements of the liquid metal fast breeder reactor program will be of use in the molten-salt technology program, and define the areas which need further experimental study.

A test was run in the sodium fluoroborate circulation loop to determine if a small quantity of water injected into the salt in the pump bowl could be detected by monitoring the off-gas stream for a change in con- taminant level. An on-line water detector failed to show a positive response when the water was injected. A temporary increase in collection rate was noted on two cold traps, but less than 50 percent of the injected water was accounted for by the total weight of material collected. The data did not yield any clear-cut evidence as to the fate of the missing water. The water injection test concluded the current phase of the fluoroborate circulation program in the PKP loop, and the loop was shut down and drained on April 13, 1970. Since the initial operation in March 1968, 11,567 hours of circulating have been accumulated.

A new test section is being installed in the inert-gas-pressurized flow system which will enable direct determination of the effect on heat been accumulated; of this total, 10,632 hours were with the clean batch of salt.

All activities in the molten salt breeder experiment salt pump procurement program and the salt pump test stand were suspended indefinitely in light of the AEC decision to redirect the molten salt reactor program along the lines of a technology program. The fabrication and assembly of the water test model of the ALPHA pump were completed. In the remote welding program, emphasis has been placed on developing an automatic welder which will produce consistently good welds without direct observations or manual adjustments. Such a system will be of value for use in the initial construction of reactors and will also be suitable for further development to achieve completely remote operation for maintenance applications in high-radiation zones. The program has reached the point at which the usefulness in reactor construction is apparent, and this phase is being enlarged to permit development of a complete system for field use.

Further studies were conducted of the part-load steady-state behavior of the reference molten salt breeder reactor plant. Cases studied involving both constant and variable secondary salt flow rate with load produced un- acceptably low temperatures at the reactor inlet and/or in the secondary salt cold leg. The addition of a variable bypass of the secondary salt around the primary heat exchanger allowed the plant to be operated with constant steam and reactor inlet temperatures and with an essentially constant secondary salt cold leg tempera- ture for loads between 20 and 100 percent of design load. The maximum deviation of the cold leg temperature from its design value of 850 degrees Fahrenheit was about 8 degrees Fahrenheit. Allowing the steam temperature to increase with decreasing load permitted the plant to operate with constant reactor inlet and secondary salt cold leg temperatures over the same power range. The maximum increase in steam temperature was to approximately 1110 degrees Fahrenheit, occurririg at 50 percent load. A new test section is being installed in the inert-gas-pressurized flow system which will enable direct determination of the effect on heat transfer of a hydrodynamic entrance length ahead of the heated section. This will be accomplished by alternating flow in a 48-inch-long tube, only half of which is used to transfer heat to the molten salt. The need for such an investigation arises from results of the earlier studies which were made without an entrance length and which suggested that, in the low transitional flow range, developed turbulent flow was not achieved at high heat fluxes; hence, significant variation in local heat transfer coefficient with position along the test section was observed. It is also planned to study the effect of wetting on heat transfer by variation in oxidation state of the salt thoursough addition of a metal such as uranium and to monitor the wetting characteristics during operation by a bubble pressure technique. A technique has been developed that can be used to determine the contact angle at-a fluid-solid-gas interface by measuring the pressure difference between the liquid and gas as the gas bubble grows slowly on the tip of a capillary tube immersed in the liquid. The contact angle can be related to the radius of attachment of the bubble to the capillary tube and to a reduced pressure difference which depends on the predictable behavior of the bubble. Experiments using water on stainless steel

(wetting), water on Teflon (partially wetting), and mercury on stainless steel (nonwetting) have verified the validity of the method, which will be used to monitor wetting characteristics of the molten salt in the next series of heat transfer experiments.

Mass transfer coefficients for helium bubbles in a 2-inch diameter pipe have been obtained for thoursee glycerol-water mixtures (corresponding to Schmidt moduli of 419, 2015, and 3446) over the Reynolds modulus range from 4000 to 180000. The coefficients were found to increase with increasing bubble diameter in the range from 0.02 to 0.05 inch mean bubble diameter and, for a 0.02 inch bubble, to approach a nearly constant value characteristic of that for bubbles rising through a quiescent liquid at low values of the Reynolds modulus.

The radiator tubing was found to have an oxide film of about 2 mils on the outside. The microstructure was modified to a depth of about 5 mils on the inside (salt side), but we attribute this change to absorption of lubricant during tube manufacture rather than to corrosion. The inlet thermocouple well had a crack in the root pass of the weld that penetrated about 3 mils and went almost completely around the weld. This crack was likely formed when the weld was made due to the poor fitup of the parts to be welded. The weld did not show any evidence of corrosion but did show the modified surface structure that we attribute to cold working. '

We found that a modified composition of Hastelloy Nickel containing 1.2 percent titanium formed stacking fault precipitates during aging. These precipitates increased the strength and decreased the fracture strain in the unirradiated condition, but had little effect upon the properties of irradiated material. Postirradiation creep-rupture tests on alloys modified with Titanium, Niobium, and Hafnium have been run. Generally, the laboratory melts have better properties than small commercial melts. A study of the effects of various preirradiation anneals has shown that the optimum postirradiation properties result from a 1-hours anneal at 1177 degrees Celsius (the standard mill anneal for Hastelloy Nickel). Several small commercial melts containing small additions of Titanium, Niobium, and Hafnium have been welded with weld wire from the same heats. All alloys were weldable except those containing relatively large amounts of hafnium (0.7 percent) and zirconium (greater than 0.4 percent). Creep-rupture tests on these same alloys have been run at 650 and 760 degrees Celsius. They are stronger than standard Hastelloy Nickel under all conditions investigated. Electron microscopy of these alloys has shown that the characteristic fine carbide dispersions developed in laboratory heats containing hafnium are not formed in commercial alloys containing hafnium.

Corrosion studies of Hastelloy Nickel in sodium fluoroborate continue to show a marked deleterious effect of water on the corrosion rate. Hastelloy Nickel samples exposed to steam in the unstressed condition continue to show low corrosion rates afeeter 10,000 hours of exposure. A duplex tube consisting of Incoloy 800 and nickel 280 is being evaluated for possible use in the steam generator.

The design and fabrication of components for a molybdenum reductive extraction test stand have con- tinued. In addition to welding and brazing, mechanical couplings are being evaluated as a joining technique. Commercially available molybdenum tubing was pro- cured for the connecting lines of the loop. Two end-cap geometries for the 37 percent-inch diameter heat pots and upper and lower column disengaging sections have been fabricated by back-extrusion, and material properties are being evaluated. '

Additional calculations were made to identify the important operating parameters and to determine optimum operating conditions for a flowsheet that uses fluorination—reductive extraction for isolation of protactinium and the metal transfer process for rare-earth removal. Calculations were also made to investigate the operation of an oxide precipitator for removal of uranjum from fuel salt from which protactinium had already been removed. The results indicate that greater than 99 percent of the uranium can be removed with a small number of stages in a countercurrent system and that the oxide stream produced will have a Uranium dioxide concentration of greater than 90 percent. Less than 1 percent of the thorium fed to the system would be precipitated with the uranium.

Chemical studies in support of the development of a metal-transfer process for removing rare-earth and other fission products from single-fluid molten salt breeder reactor fuels were continued. Additional data were obtained on the distribution of rare earths and thorium between liquid bismuth solutions and molten Lithium chloride, Lithium bromide, and Lithium chloride-Lithium Fluoride. These data confirmed previous indications that the distribution behavior of most elements was not markedly affected by temperature variation and that contamination of the acceptor salt with fluoride fuel salt reduces the thorium-rare-earth separation factor. The results of one experiment involving the extraction of europium from Lithium chloride indicated that distribution coefficient data obtained with low concentrations of lithium in the bismuth phase can be extrapolated to include bismuth solutions having lithium concentrations as high as 35 atom percent. The solubility of neodymium in a liquid lithium-bismuth solution that contained 38 atom percent lithium was found to be higher than that reported for pure bismuth. The solubility of Lanthanum oxychloride in molten Lithium chloride at 640 degrees Celsius was found to be very low.

Oxide precipitation methods are being considered for use in the isolation of protactinium and uranium from molten salt breeder reactor fuel salt. It was shown that protactinium could be selectively precipitated from Lithium fluoride-Beryllium fluoride-Thorium tetrafluoride-Uranium tetrafluoride (71.7-16-12-0.3 mole  percent) by addition of oxide to the system afeeter the salt had been extensively hydrofluorinated. Calculations based on equilibrium data available in the literature showed that, under certain conditions, it will be possible to precipitate a large fraction of the uranium from molten salt breeder reactor fuel salt with little attendant precipitation of Thorium dioxide

Experimental work in the flow-through reductive extraction facility was continued afeeter the original packed column had been replaced with a modified column packed with quarter inch Raschig rings. Three successful hydrodynamic experiments in which bismuth and molten salt were contacted countercurrently were carried out with the new column. The flooding data obtained agreed well with a flooding correlation developed earlier from the study of a mercury-water system. A set of pressure drop measurements was made with only salt flowing through the column; these measurements will be used for future comparison to detect possible iron deposition in the column. Uranium was added to the Lithium fluoride-Beryllium fluoride-Thorium tetrafluoride-Uranium tetrafluoride salt in the form of an Lithium Fluoride-Uranium tetrafluoride eutectic in preparation for mass transfer experiments with uranium. The first mass transfer experiment resulted in essentially no transfer of uranium as the result of an error in adding thorium reductant to the bismuth prior to the run. The second experiment, UTR-2, was the first successful demonstration of the reductive extraction of uranium into bismuth in a flowing system. Greater than 95 percent of the uranium was extracted into the bismuth phase, which initially contained a 140 percent stoichiometric excess of reductant.

A report describing the conceptual design of the molybdenum reductive extraction system is being written, Welding and brazing have been selected as the methods for assembling the molybdenum vessels and piping. Conceptual full-size layout, head pot, and equipment support drawings have been prepared. A one third-scale model of the molybdenum equipment and piping has been built. A full-size transparent plastic mockup of the bismuth head pot and the upper part of the reductive extraction column has been installed for testing with mercury and water. A gas pulse pump is being developed as a possible replacement for the gas-lift pumps considered thus far.

Measurements were made of pressure drop, dispersed- phase holdup, and flooding during the countercurrent flow of mercury and water in a 2-inch inner diameter column packed with half inch-inch Raschig rings. The data on holdup and flooding for half inch Raschig rings, as well as those reported earlier for quarter-inch Raschig rings and solid cylinders and for three eighths inch Raschig rings, can be correlated in terms of a constant superficial slip velocity which is a function of packing size only. A simple relation has not been found for correlating the pressure drop data. An expression based on the mercury-water data is given for predicting flooding and dispersed-phase holdup in packed columns thoursough which salt and bismuth are in countercurrent flow.

Measurements of axial dispersion in packed columns during the countercurrent flow of fluids having high densities and a large density difference have been continued. These experiments, which use mercury and water, are intended to simulate the behavior of bismuth and molten salt. Data are reported for quarter inch Raschig rings, quarter inch solid cylinders, and half inch Raschig rings. These and previously reported data indicate that the axial dispersion coefficient is independent of the dispersed-phase flow rate for three eighths inch and half inch packing but is inversely proportional to the continuous-phase flow rate for quarter inch packing.

Data are reported on the effects of the column and gas inlet diameters on axial mixing in open columns in which air and water are in countercurrent flow. The dispersion coefficient was found to be independent of the gas inlet diameter for diameters of 0.04 to 0.17 inch At high gas flow rates, little difference in dispersion coefficient was found at a given gas flow rate in columns having diameters of 1 and a half, 2, and 3 inch. At low gas flow rates, dispersion coefficients were essentially the same for the 2- and 3-inch diameter columns; however, the results obtained for the 1 and a half inch column were significantly lower.

The first metal transfer experiment for study of the removal of rare earths from single-fluid molten salt breeder reactor fuel salt has been completed. Approximately 50 percent of the lanthanum and 25 percent of the neodymium originally in the fluoride salt were extracted; however, the rare earths did not collect in the lithium-bismuth stripping solution as expected. The distribution coefficients for lanthanum and neodymium between the fluoride salt and the thorium-saturated bismuth were relatively constant and were in agreement with expected values. The distribution coefficients for lanthanum and neodymium between the chloride salt and the thorium-saturated bismuth were higher than anticipated initially but approached the expected values toward the end of the experiment.

Calculations were made to show the effects of coil current, frequency, temperature difference, and fluorinator diameter on the frozen film thickness in a continuous fluorinator heated by high-frequency induced currents. A fluorinator fabricated from 6-inch sched 40 pipe containing a 5-inch inner diameter coil that had two turns per inch was tentatively chosen for an experiment to demonstrate corrosion protection by use of a frozen wall. The calculations indicated that a frozen film having a thickness of 0.3 inch could be maintained over the coil with a temperature difference of 51 degrees Celsius across the film if a coil current of 11 amps at 400 kilohertz were used. A 9.2 kilowatt generator would be required for a 5 feet long fluorinator under the assumed conditions.

Although a maximum stable film thickness exists, there appears to be no serious control problem, since the thickness of the frozen film changes rather slowly. Because of uncertainties in the calculations, a simulated fluorinator is being built to permit the study of heat generation and heat transfer. A 30 percent Nitroxyl; solution will represent molten salt in the system.

Two experiments related to electrolytic cell development were performed. The first was carried out in an all-metal cell to determine whether quartz used in previous tests contributed to the formation of black material in the salt. No black material was seen during the experiment; however, we now believe that the absence of the black material is probably due to the absence of a bismuth cathode rather than to the absence of quartz. This conclusion is supported by the results of a second experiment, which was carried out in a quartz cell,

The second experiment allowed us to study the reduction of lithium from pure Lithium chloride using a bismuth cathode. This may provide a method for recovering lithium from salt discard streams from the metal transfer process. The cell, which used a rounded graphite anode, was operated at anode current densities up to 8.6 Amps per squared centimeter. Chlorine disengaged readily from the anode. During the passage of current, the Lithium chloride became red; we believe that this color change was caused by the dissolution of Li;Bi that was present on the cathode surface. It is possible that the dark material noted earlier in' cells resulted from the reaction of Lithium Bismuthide with Bismuth(III) fluoride in the salt to form finely divided bismuth.

 Ten flooding runs were carried out with molten salt at salt flow rates ranging from 50 to 400 cubic centimeters per minute. Five of the runs were made with argon at flow rates up to 7.5 liters per minute, and five were made with hydrogen at flow rates up to 30 liters per minute. At the maximum flow rate (about 19 percent of the calculated flooding rate), a pressure drop of 40 inch water was observed across the packed column.