Design efforts on the Molten Salt Reactor Experiment continued on all fronts. Although findings of continuing studies necessitated some revisions, both the goals of the experiment and the basic design of the plant remained unchanged. The reactor is to provide facilities for demonstration of safety, dependability, and serviceability of molten-salt systems and is intended to produce information on the behavior of graphite under irradiation and in contact with molten salts. The reactor, fuel pump, and heat exchanger will be located in the reactor cell. A component and process-piping layout was completed with a check of thermal stresses in the piping. Layout of auxiliary connections is in progress. Checking of thermal stresses in the coolant piping is in progress. The drain-tank area layout is under revision following the decision to eliminate freeze flanges from the drain lines in the initial construction. Detail drawings of the reactor were completed. A set of five molybdenum bands was included in the midplane of the graphite core to restrain bowing of the stringers caused by the fast-flux gradient. Four poison tubes are intended to introduce nuclear poison in the reactor to balance reactivity changes stemming from xenon sorption or potential fuel absorption in the moderator graphite. The fuel fraction in the core was raised to 22.5%, minimizing the nuclear consequences of such eventualities. The design of the air-cooled radiator and drain tanks was completed. The off-gas system piping is designed to accommodate either fresh or recycled helium. The xenon decay time has been increased to a minimum of 72 days, so that the radioactivity of the stored helium does not exceed 15 curies. Salt-containing lines and components will be provided with heaters capable of heating the system to 1250°F. Heating units were designed for the reactor, drain tanks, and piping. Specifications were prepared for the single-arm remote-maintenance manipulator. Design of individual tools and racks is in progress. Heat-balance and neutron-level measurements serve as indicators of reactor power. Automatic control of reactor power appears necessary because of the sluggishness of the system and uncertainties of graphite. The poison tubes provide a total of 12% reactivity for control purposes. Interlocking functions will control the heat withdrawal at the radiator. Building and site improvements will be accomplished in four steps, scheduled for completion by October 1961. Engineering is progressing consistently with this goal. Shielding requirements have been established, and specifications and designs for services and utilities are in progress. Construction work on the reactor will be divided between lump-sum and cost-plus-fixed-fee contractors to accomplish the work most economically. The installation of the reactor is to be completed by July 1963. Design of an improved freeze flange for 6-inch molten-salt piping was completed, and such flanges are being fabricated for testing. Freeze flanges of the original design for 3-1/2-inch and 4-inch pipe passed a test consisting of 104 thermal cycles without mechanical failure, although excessive gas leakage occurred. Freeze valves opened by direct resistance heating, by induction heating, and by Calrod heaters were tested successfully. The latter were adopted for the molten salt reactor experiment. Prototypes of heaters for the molten salt reactor experiment (MSRE) piping and the core vessel have been fabricated for testing. A sampler-enricher concept devised for the molten salt reactor experiment operates within a two-chambered dry box located above and to one side of the reactor pit. A mockup of its drive mechanism, latch, sample capsule, connecting tube, latch stop, and capsule guide was built and tested. A solder freeze valve to isolate the sampler during maintenance was developed. Flow tests of the molten salt reactor experiment core were conducted in a one-fifth-scale model. Proper flow distribution in the entrance volute, the vessel cooling annulus, and the bottom plenum chamber was verified. A test unit was built to evaluate titanium, uranium, and other materials for use as high-temperature oxygen getters in helium streams. A maintenance philosophy including both remote and semidirect operations was evolved for the molten salt reactor experiment. The remote-maintenance demonstration facility was operated successfully with salt following extensive maintenance, thereby completing the demonstration. The facility is being converted to the study of sample molten salt reactor experiment problems, the first of which is replacement of the fuel pump. A one-twelfth-scale model of the molten salt reactor experiment is being constructed, and the reactor cell was completed. A program to develop a remotely brazed joint was started. Several mechanical disconnects for auxiliary lines were procured and tested. Operation of long-term forced-circulation corrosion test loops was concluded. Two natural-convection salt loops were placed in service to investigate the compatibility of graphite, molybdenum, and INOR-8 in molten salt reactor experiment fuel. A facility for testing the molten salt reactor experiment fuel pump was completed, and various dynamic and hydraulic characteristics were determined. The design of the hot-test prototype of the molten salt reactor experiment fuel pump has been completed, and fabrication has started. Procurement has been initiated for cast INOR-8 hydraulic parts and for the drive motors and the variable-frequency supply. An experiment is being prepared to determine the amount of gas back-diffusing from the pump bowl into the lubrication system. A survey was made of thermal stresses in the Molten Salt Reactor Experiment (MSRE) primary pump tank, and corrective design action was taken in those areas where the stresses were excessive. The design of the hot-test stand for the molten salt reactor experiment fuel pump has been completed, and fabrication has begun. The design of the water test stand for the molten salt reactor experiment coolant pump is essentially complete. The pump containing a salt-lubricated journal bearing has continued to operate satisfactorily after 7440 hours at 1225°F, including 72 stops and starts. The small frozen-lead-sealed pump failed after 22,000 hours of operation, apparently as a result of erosion of the shaft by metal oxides. Design and fabrication of the molten salt reactor experiment engineering test loop have been completed. Several types of end seals are being developed for use as cold end seals for mineral-insulated sheathed thermocouples in molten salt reactor experiment installations. Remote electrical, thermocouple, and instrument disconnects have been developed for use in the molten salt reactor experiment. Prototypes of the electrical and thermocouple disconnects were fabricated and were tested in a remote-maintenance facility. A float-type, electric transmitting continuous level indicator is being developed for measuring salt levels in the molten salt reactor experiment pump bowls. The feasibility of using inductance probes for single-point measurement of molten-salt levels is being investigated. A number of survey-type calculations were performed to obtain information concerning various alternative designs for the molten salt reactor experiment core. Dividing the core into two or three concentric cylindrical regions having different fuel volume fractions did not lead to sufficient decrease in circulating-system inventory or sufficient improvement in the power-density shape to justify the additional complications arising in fabrication of a multiregion core. The reactivity worth of the proposed control poison tubes was estimated using a two-group, two-dimensional model with group constants derived from multigroup, one-dimensional calculations. The results indicate that the proposed four tubes have a total worth of 11% reactivity and that the tubes may be cut off 1 foot below the top of the core without serious loss of reactivity worth. Preliminary nuclear calculations were completed for an molten salt reactor experiment core having the fuel separated from the graphite by INOR-8 tubes. For a core with 8 volume percent fuel salt, insertion of 30-millimeter thick 2-inch diameter INOR-8 tubes increased the critical circulating-system inventory by about 70%; the percentage of fissions caused by thermal neutrons decreased from 92% to about 88%; the average number of fission neutrons released per neutron absorbed in fuel was reduced from 2.02 to about 2.00; and the temperature coefficient of reactivity due to expansion of the core salt was reduced by about 1%. Estimates were made of the dose rates at various places outside the reactor cell. Above the reactor-cell top plug, having a thickness of 7 feet of ordinary concrete, the dose rate during 10 Megawatts operation was estimated to be 90 milliroentgens per hour. Above the drain-tank-cell top plug, having a thickness of 6 ft of ordinary concrete, the dose rate immediately after draining the reactor core was estimated to be 62 milliroentgens per hour. 2 hours after draining the core this dose rate was 0.47 milliroentgens per hour, and the integrated dose over a long period of time amounted to less than 25 milliroentgens. Examinations were completed on two INOR-8 forced-convection loops which operated with fluoride mixtures for 8,100 and 14,500 hours. Attack in the form of surface roughening and pitting to a maximum depth of 1.5 thousandths of an inch was found in the former loop; the latter showed no attack, except for the formation of a thin surface layer. Examinations of two Inconel forced-convection loops, which operated with fluoride mixtures for periods of 13,150 and 15,000 hr, revealed attack in the form of intergranular void formation to maximum depths of 13 and 24 thousandths of an inch, respectively. Two thermal-convection loop tests were started to determine the compatibility of the system salt-graphite-molybdenum-INOR-8, with the molybdenum in intimate contact with both the graphite and the INOR-8. The purpose of these tests is to confirm the feasibility of utilizing molybdenum bands to prevent lateral distortion of the graphite bundle in the molten salt reactor experiment core. During routine welder qualification tests on INOR-8, weld cracking was observed in some heats of material. A study is therefore being made to determine the reasons for the cracking and to develop methods for alleviating the condition. The addition of 2 weight percent Niobiom to INOR-8 appears to completely overcome weld-metal cracking on the materials investigated. The Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute hot-ductility test is being used to determine the base-metal cracking susceptibility of several heats of INOR-8. Heats which have been shown to be subject to heat-affected-zone cracking also have exhibited poor hot ductility in this test. The development of techniques for producing solidified-metal seals for molten salt reactor applications is continuing. An INOR-8 sump-type seal with a gold-copper alloy operated successfully for ten closures. A metallographic evaluation of a Reactor Division sump-type seal was also conducted. A seal utilizing an impregnated metal-fiber compact was also successfully operated, and the experiment is described. Investigations of Nickel-Molybdenum-Chromium-Iron alloys had shown that an intermetallic compound formed at compositions above the upper limits specified for INOR-8. The investigation was continued to determine whether or not the intermetallic phase would form in alloys within the upper compositional limits of INOR-8. Microstructural examinations were made of a number of alloys with compositions within the range of interest which had been heat treated for various times and temperatures. The results of this investigation to date strongly indicate that the intermetallic phase will not precipitate from alloys within the compositional limits of INOR-8. The allowable design stresses for INOR-8 were modified as a result of the acquisition of more complete property data and the application of more critical criteria. These criteria include a consideration of radiation damage effects. Tensile data were obtained for cast INOR-8, and creep and stress-rupture testing are projected. A study of the effect of notches on INOR-8 stress-rupture characteristics has been started. Initial results indicate that a notch with a 0.005 inch radius does not significantly weaken the material. A radiographic technique was used to determine the distribution of LiF-BeF2ThF4-UF4 salt in specimens of nine grades of low-permeability graphite following their exposure to the salt for 100 hr at 150 psig at 1300°F. It indicated that graphite can be made that will take up salt only in shallow, less than 50 mils, surface impregnation under the above conditions. The quantity of salt that can be forced into graphite may be increased by prior heating of the graphite in air, which probably enlarges the pore spaces of the graphite. When in contact with oxygen contaminated graphite at 1300 degrees F, LiF-BeF2-ThF4-UF4 precipitated uranium as UO2. Under similar conditions, LiF-BeF2-ThF4-UF4 did not develop a precipitate that could be detected radiographically, while LiF-BeF2-ZrF4-ThF4-UF4 developed a precipitate of monoclinic ZrOs. No other oxides were identified in the precipitate by powder x-ray diffraction analysis. Oxygen was not removed effectively from graphite by 20 and 100 hour purges with molten LiF-BeF2-UF4 or LiF-BeF2-ThF4-UF4. Similar purges with NaF-ZrF4-UF4 were more effective, although this salt mixture does not remove all the oxygen. Twenty hour treatments of graphite by the thermal decomposition products of NH4FHF at 1300°F appear to effectively remove oxygen from graphite, so that it can contain LiF-BeF2-UF4 for periods greater than 2000 hours at 1300°F without a detectable precipitate forming. In 100 hour exposures of INOR-8 to the thermal decomposition products of NH4FHF crystals at 1300°F, a 0.0005 inch thick reaction layer was produced on the INOR-8. The first two molten salt reactor experiment graphite-fuel capsule experiments, each containing four capsules, were examined in hot cells at the Battelle Memorial Institute. In these capsules, delicate bellows were used for encapsulating graphite immersed in fused-salt fuel. Of the eight capsules examined, only one was found intact; the bellows walls had ruptured in the other seven. It is believed that expansion of the molten-salt fuel on melting following a reactor scram caused the ruptures. Examination of the graphite specimen from the intact capsule is discussed below. A new capsule design has been made for the third experiment, based on somewhat different criteria. One objective of this experiment, which also contains four capsules, is to study samples of graphite that have been irradiated under conditions more extreme than those expected in the molten salt reactor experiment reactor. For this purpose two of the four graphite samples will be impregnated with a modified molten salt reactor experiment fuel. A second objective is to detect changes in the wetting characteristics of the fuel in contact with graphite under high-temperature irradiation. For this purpose two capsules will contain unimpregnated graphite of a type similar to that of the molten salt reactor experiment. A third objective involves the inclusion of specimens of molybdenum, INOR-8, and pyrolytic graphite in contact with both the graphite and the fuel to demonstrate the compatibility of the principal components of the molten salt reactor experiment system. The four capsules consist of heavy-walled INOR-8 cylinders, each containing a 1.25 inch diameter 3 inch long graphite cylinder. The upper half of each graphite cylinder is machined in the form of a boat-like cavity to contain 5 cubic centimeters of molten-salt fuel, in which the pyrolytic graphite and the metal specimens will be suspended. The remainder of the experiment assembly is similar to that of the previous experiments. Results of the postirradiation examination of the SLA graphite specimen from ORNL experiment 47-2 at Battelle Memorial Institute are given. Examination of the external surfaces of the graphite, up to 34 times magnification, revealed that the surfaces generally appeared to be unaffected by the irradiation. A study of a crosssectional face of the cylindrical graphite specimen by autoradiography and coring indicated that the major portion of the fission-product activity was on or very near to the exposed surfaces except for a plane of porosity that extended longitudinally through the cylinder. Intrusion of fuel salt occurred through this fault. The remainder of the interior graphite was relatively free of radioactivity with the exception of Cesium 134 and 137. Data derived by Battelle are not sufficient to distinguish between mechanisms which could explain the presence of cesium in these internal areas, and additional radiochemical studies are being conducted on the specimen at ORNL. The molten salt reactor experiment fuel composition has been revised to include 5 mole % ZrF4, and is now LiF-BeF2-ZrF4-ThF4-UF4. The melting point is 442 degrees Celsius. The purpose of the ZrF4 is to serve as an oxide scavenger and to provide protection against precipitation of UO2. When the ZrF4 to UF4 mole ratio in the liquid is high enough, excess oxide under equilibrium conditions causes precipitation of ZrO2 rather than UO2. The protection due to ZrF4 remains effective until the ZrF4 to UF4 mole ratio falls to about 2. Also, at higher ZrF4 concentrations there may be a beneficial effect due to complexing of oxide ions by species such as ZrO+2. The density of the fuel, given by the equation, density in grams per cubic centimeter equals 2.84 minus 0.00056 times Temperature in °C, is about 2.5 at reactor temperatures. At these temperatures the vapor pressure is negligible. Slow freezing of the fuel, under conditions which favor segregation, gives an initial solidification of phases such as 6LiFBeF2ZrF4, thereby depleting the ZrF4 concentration in the remaining unfrozen liquid. Confusion has been resolved regarding the melting point of the molten salt reactor experiment coolant LiFBeF2. It has a melting point of 450°C. The solubility of BF2 in molten salt reactor experiment-type fuels is about 1000 times that of noble gases and is in a suitable range for nuclear control schemes involving a volatile poison. Tests of the retention of BF3 on graphite gave a favorably low answer of about 10 parts per million. Xenon poisoning due to diffusion of xenon into unclad graphite considered for use in the molten salt reactor experiment is more serious than previously recognized and difficult to remedy by merely decreasing permeability of the graphite. The concentration gradient controlling diffusion of xenon in graphite tends to steepen sharply with lower gas permeabilities, giving increased driving force which tends to counteract benefits of increased resistance. The capillary behavior of molten salt reactor experiment fuel in graphite corresponds satisfactorily to the nonwetting performance expected from estimated surface tensions and measured densities, at least in clean systems. Exposure of the salt and graphite to air leads to the formation of oxide films at the interface and to superficial manifestations of good wetting. Proposed procedures for chemical analysis of the operating molten salt reactor experiment fuel are being actively developed. The problem is primarily one of modifying existing procedures to adapt them for use in the High Radiation Level Analytical Facility. The enthalpy of the molten salt reactor experiment fuel mixture was determined over the temperature range 100 to 800°C. The mean value for the heat capacity of the liquid between 550 and 800 °C was calculated to be 0.451 calories per gram per degrees Celsius, which agrees well with the value 0.458 calories per gram per degrees Celsius estimated from an empirical relationship developed from data for similar salt systems. A preliminary value of 0.53 calories per gram per degrees celsius was obtained for the heat capacity of the coolant mixture LiF-BeF2, between 400 and 650°C. Initial measurements of the viscosity of the fuel mixture indicate that, although the overall results scatter widely, kinematic viscosities based on the lower limits of three sets of data are in reasonable agreement. Thus, at 650°C, the data range from 2.05 to 3.15 centistokes and at 800°C, from 1.2 to 1.8 centistokes. The study of heat transfer for the mixture LiF-BeF2-UF4-ThF4 flowing in heated Inconel and INOR-8 tubes was discontinued after 7050 hours of circulation. A preliminary analysis of the data showed no significant trend as a function of the exposure time. The data lie on average 25% below the general heat-transfer correlation for other normal fluids in the range N of RE equal to 10,000 to 20,000. Rare earths, but not ThF4, have a high solubility in solutions of SbF5 in anhydrous hydrogen fluoride, which may have application to the problem of recovering decontaminated ThF4 from MSBR blanket salt. The LiF compound formed with this reagent, LiSbF6, was a monoclinic crystalline compound. It was found to be stable to temperatures of 600°C or more, compared to a boiling point of about 150°C for SbF5. molten salt reactor experiment fuel carrier salt LiF-BeF2 dissolved in boiling 90% HF 10% water at an average rate of about 50 mils/hr for the first 10 min, but the rate dropped to less than 10 mils/hr subsequently. The decrease in rate was probably due to a layer of soft material on the surface of the salt, which dissolved more slowly than the LiF. A laboratory-model steady-state fluorinator was operated in four runs which demonstrated that uranium could be recovered from a salt continuously. The primary problem was corrosion, probably because the design of the apparatus required operation at high temperatures. With a 0-min salt residence time and excess fluorine, about 98% of the uranium was removed in a one-stage fluorinator at about 650°C. During the past six months, several revisions were made to the original molten salt reactor experiment concept. The major concept did not change, however, and a large amount of design work was accomplished. A brief restatement of the original plan will be made before taking up in some detail the features that have been modified.  The reactor consists of a graphite-moderated core encased in an INOR-8 container, through which is pumped a molten-salt mixture consisting of LiF, BeF2, ZrF4, and ThF4 to which is added enough U235 in the form of UF4 to achieve criticality in the core. The reactor vessel, fuel circulating pump, and heat exchanger are located in the reactor containment cell. The non-fuel-bearing coolant salt, LiF-BeF2 circulates through the tube side of the heat exchanger and through the air-cooled radiator located outside the reactor cell. The coolant circulating pump is also located outside the cell in the same general region as the radiator. Drain tanks for the fuel salt are located in the drain-tank cell, separate from the reactor cell but having the same atmosphere and pressure requirements. One addition was made to the drain-tank complex. A fourth tank for storage and subsequent batch-dispensing of spent fuel has been added. This fourth tank is located in a separate but adjacent cell. The essential changes in design have arisen from two insufficiently understood properties of graphite: the extent of its permeation by fuel salt and the amount of xenon holdup by the graphite. Experiments have generally established that the fuel will permeate only about 1 volume percent of certain grades of graphite. This degree of permeation occurs, however, in the absence of radiation and the possible complications imposed by fission fragment recoils in the graphite. At this stage there are not enough in-pile data to warrant complete assurance that greater permeation will not occur in the reactor. This lack of knowledge has brought about two modifications of design. One of these is the increase of fuel fraction within the core from 12% to 22.5%. This increase minimizes the reactivity change associated with soaking of graphite by the fuel. It also has an additional beneficial effect in that it reduces the concentration of uranium and therefore results in a lower fuel inventory. The only accompanying adverse effect is an insignificant rise, about 30 degrees Fahrenheit, in hot-spot temperature in the core. The second design change involves adding poison tubes within the core. Four 1-inch-diameter inverted thimbles are now inserted into the core and provide means for inserting or removing liquid poison in a controlled manner. The tubes provide ample poison for overriding complete saturation of the graphite by fuel. The absorption of xenon by graphite has been studied theoretically and experimentally, and with the gas permeability of the graphite expected to be used in the molten salt reactor experiment, it is apparent that the xenon poison level will be 2-4% reactivity. The poison tubes can be used to compensate for the decay of xenon after reactor shutdown. A third change in the design, also dictated by the indeterminant status of the graphite problem, involves a better method of sampling the core graphite during the course of the experiment. An additional penetration into the top of the reactor vessel has been provided. Through this penetration, with a minimum of inconvenience, a sample of graphite can be removed from the core for study. It is obvious from these design changes that, in addition to establishing the safety, dependability and maintainability of the molten-salt reactor system, a fourth objective has been added to the project. This objective is to establish the feasibility of unclad graphite as a moderator for the molten-salt reactor. Except for the changes referred to, the molten salt reactor experiment design proceeded in accordance with the original plan. Component design, system layout, building-alteration design, and services provisions progressed satisfactorily. Detailed discussion of these design phases follows. A number of significant changes to the reactor core and vessel were made during the period covered by this report. Briefly they are: the flow rate was reduced to 1200 gpm, the core inlet volute was changed to a flow distributor, the fuel volume in the core was increased to 22.5%, a poison system was added, a method of sampling graphite near the outer periphery will be added, a neutron shield was incorporated in the head, and other minor changes were made. Detail drawings of the reactor have been completed and are being reviewed. Checking of all drawings is in progress. The reactor receives the fuel salt from the cold end of the fuel heat exchanger. Once in the vessel, the salt passes down in a 1-inch-wide annulus in a helical path. The swirl is stopped at the bottom of the vessel, and the fuel flows upward through the graphite-moderated core, through the holes of the neutron shield, and finally leaves through a bellmouthed outlet pipe. Changes in the fuel composition resulting in an increased density and specific heat made it possible to lower the flow rate to 1,200 gpm and obtain the 50°F desired change in temperature. The fuel volume was increased to 22.5% by increasing the width of the channel to 0.4 inches, maintaining the length at 1.2 inches, but with semicircular ends. The reduction in flow rate and increased volume lowered the velocity to approximately 0.72 fps and the Reynolds number to approximately 1200. The flow in the annulus remains turbulent, and maintaining the core wall at a reasonable temperature presents no problem. The fuel flow passages will be machined in the four faces of the graphite stringers, but no cross-communicating channels will be provided. Five molybdenum bands will cover the middle one-third of the matrix. It is possible that a full cross-sectional break could occur in a graphite stringer. Should this happen, the upper piece would tend to float upward approximately 0.75 inches, creating a fuel pocket 2 by 2 by 0.75 inches. This fuel, being relatively stagnant, might reach a very high temperature. To prevent this possibility, an INOR rod will be placed horizontally through the upper ends of the graphite blocks, one rod in each row. The coarse screen at the top will not be used, but a neutron shield will be placed in the upper head. This shield will be a large INOR-8 casting of circular shape but varying in thickness from 4.75 inches near the outer edge to approximately 8.75 inches at the center. It is perforated by 1.125-inch-diameter holes on a 2-inch square spacing. The antiswirl vanes in the lower head extend radially 11 inches toward the center from the outer periphery. This reduces the radial pressure difference to approximately 0.3 inches of fuel salt. The pressure drop across the graphite lattice supporting the stringers is approximately 4.5 inches, which, being large in comparison to the radial pressure difference, assures good flow distribution to the vertical fuel channels. A poison-tube system was added for control during startup and to compensate for xenon poisoning effects. Poisoning will be accomplished by means of a molten salt composed of Li6F and BeF2. In the reactor, the poison salt will be contained in four 1-inch outer diameter 0.065-inch wall tubes, each separately controlled. The tubes enter the reactor vessel through the lower head on a 4-inch radius and extend through the graphite stringers to the upper end where they are capped off. The section of the tube which passes through the lower head is a 0.75-inch pipe and joins the 1-inch outer diameter tube just inside the vessel. Outside the reactor vessel, a 0.5-inch pipe goes to a reservoir located just above the flow distributor, thus forming a U-tube. A 0.25-inch tube enters the 1-inch outer diameter tube through an elbow outside the vessel head and extends to the upper end where it terminates open-ended. Gas pressure is required to keep the poison out of the reactor, thus providing a failsafe condition. A penetration will be provided in the top head near the outer periphery for removing graphite samples without removing the pump. Details of the method of removal have not yet been determined. The fuel inlet volute was replaced by a flow distributor. The distributor is composed of a perforated section of the vessel wall and a constant-area casing around the outside of the vessel enclosing these holes. The holes are 0.75 inches in diameter and enter the vessel wall at a 30° angle to the tangent to the outer vessel surface. This arrangement provides the swirling flow desirable in the annulus. The holes have a variable circumferential spacing to provide a more even flow distribution to the annulus. The design of the heat exchanger was revised to compensate for changes in composition and properties of the fuel and coolant salts. Drafts of heat transfer and pressure-drop design reports were completed. A summary of stress calculations was also drafted. Specifications were approved. According to the specifications, the fabricator will be responsible for detailed design and completion of the stress analysis. The design of an air-cooled radiator coil, enclosure, and superstructure was completed, and drawings were submitted for checking and review. A few minor changes in the physical arrangement as previously reported were made. Radiator-coil tube spacing was changed from a 1.5-inch triangular pitch to a diamond pitch arrangement. Spacing of tubes within a given row was maintained at 1.5 inches, but the spacing between tube rows was changed from 1.30 inches to 1.5 inches. Alternate tube rows were staggered to give a transverse spacing between tubes in adjacent rows of 0.75 inches. The change in tube spacing decreased the air-side pressure drop from 11.6 inches H2O to 9.9 inches H2O. The subheaders were redesigned to be forged from solid stock and bored to nominal 2.5 inch sched-40 pipe dimensions. This change eliminated a difficult welding situation by providing integral forged and bored nipples on the subheaders to which the radiator tubes will be welded. It also eliminated the need for a separate line previously required for draining the subheaders. The main header was made 8 inches in inside diameter with a 0.5 inch thick wall to provide enough material for drawing nipples to which the subheaders will be welded. The salt-side pressure drop was recalculated and was found to be 21.4 psi. Design of an insulated structure for enclosing and supporting the radiator coil was also completed. The radiator coil will be enclosed in the insulated structure, which is equipped with vertically operating insulated doors. During periods when heat must be supplied to the coil to maintain the coolant salt in a liquid state, the doors will be closed to form a reasonably air-tight enclosure. The radiator coil will be heated by means of panels containing resistance heating elements. Heat transmission from the panels to the coil will be primarily by radiation, with some convection caused by the air heated within the enclosure. The doors are suspended from roller chains which run over sprockets to a single counterweight, which weighs less than the combined weight of the two doors. When the doors are in the up (open) position, the counterweight is held down by three magnets. In event of power failure or reactor scram, the magnets release the counterweight, and the doors fall freely, closing in about 3 sec. At other times, the doors will be lowered or raised in about 1 min by an electric motor through a magnetic clutch-brake arrangement. Preliminary drawings were also made for modifications to the existing air duct, arrangement of the radiator enclosure support structure, and design of the bypass duct for control of air flow. Because the two fans that provide the cooling air will run at constant speed, the bypass duct will be used to control the amount of air passing over the radiator tubes by short-circuiting part of the air around the radiator. The bypass duct will also perform three other important functions. At low reactor power levels, the air leaving the radiator will be at very high temperatures. During these periods, the bypass will allow cooler air to mix with the high temperature air to keep the duct at a tem perature below 300°F. At higher reactor power levels when the air leaving the radiator is at a lower temperature, the bypass will be closed. The bypass duct will be used to reduce the wind force on the radiator door in event of power failure or reactor scram. In either of these occurrences, the radiator doors will be closed and the fans will be running down, still delivering air. The air will then be routed around the radiator through the open bypass, reducing the air static pressure on the radiator. During reactor down-periods when heat is being supplied to the radiator tubes in the enclosed radiator frame, the bypass duct will be open to reduce the stack effect across the radiator. Designs were completed for two duplicate fuel drain tanks, one flush-salt tank, and one coolant drain tank. The nozzle connections are subject to change in accordance with the layout of the tanks in their cell. Two minor additional changes were made to the fuel drain tanks. A guard was added to protect the flexible steam tubes from incidental damage during maintenance, and the size of the steam dome was reduced to facilitate maintenance of the tank heaters. Stresses in the salt lines within the reactor containment cell were analyzed by using an Oracle code. Maximum stresses formed were 7050 psi, with the piping at 1200°F and isothermal. With the reactor running at a power of 10 megawatts, the maximum stress was 3550 pounds per square inch. These stresses are acceptably low. The coolant-salt circuit, including radiator, pump, piping, and drain system, was coded for analysis, but the analysis was not completed. The drain-tank area for the fuel system was revised. Freeze flanges, originally intended to be used on the drain lines, are cumbersome and make the layout difficult, and may never be required. The drain lines will be installed as an all-welded system. At points where lines must be removed if replacement of pipe or components becomes necessary, provision will be made for a brazed seal when the new pipe is put in. Brazed joints are satisfactory for salt systems, particularly for small-diameter pipes and locations which are only temporarily in contact with molten salt. Both these conditions apply to the drain lines. The drain valve for the fuel system is now located directly under the reactor vessel. When this valve is frozen, the drain line from the valve back to the draintank manifold will be drained of salt. This is made possible by a vent line which runs from the drain-tank side of the valve to the gas space within the pump bowl. Drawings showing this drain system, including the drain-tank arrangement, are being revised and are not ready for inclusion in this report. The area immediately north of the drain-tank area has been allocated for spent fuel storage and transfer operations. It is assumed that fuel will be transferred to another location for reprocessing. Both the capacity of existing processing facilities and calculations of shielding requirements indicate that the size of individual shipments should be 50 liters, and thus each fuel charge will have to be subdivided into approximately 30 batches for transfer to the processing plant. Recovery of the uranium from a fuel charge will require three to six months, and it seems desirable to isolate the spent fuel from the operational storage tanks if simultaneous power operation and spent-fuel processing are contemplated. Lubricating-oil systems for the circulating pumps have been located in the spectrometer tunnel. Piping for the oil, gas, and other auxiliary lines to the pump is 80% complete. Detailed studies are being made of the auxiliary piping, power cable and disconnect layout, and thermocouple cable and disconnect layout in the reactor containment cell. Electrical leads for the heaters will terminate in receptacles, into which plugs from each heater section can be inserted. These plug units can be inserted or removed remotely by means of the maintenance equipment provided. Design of these plugs and receptacles was completed, and specimens were fabricated for testing. Plugs and receptacles for thermocouple use were also fabricated and are being tested. Overall design criteria were established for the cover gas system, and preliminary process and instrument flowsheets were issued for review. Work began on the detailed design of the charcoal beds and other system components. The following changes have been made since the original concepts were outlined. The decay time of the recycle helium was increased to a minimum of 72 days. The maximum quantity of radioactivity permitted in the stored helium was reduced to 15 curies. These changes were made in order to minimize the hazard involved in storing radioactive gas. Under the original design, a total contained activity of 7000 curies was possible. The dryer and oxygen-removal units in the fresh helium supply are being designed to operate at 250 psig. This change will eliminate the need for recompressing the gas in this portion of the system, improving both the economy and reliability of the operation. System piping is so arranged that the fuel-salt pump and storage tanks may use either recycle or fresh helium, while the remaining portions of the system are served only by the fresh helium supply. A high-flow, low-heat-load charcoal bed is provided to take care of venting during salt transfer operations. All salt-containing components and lines in the system must be equipped with heaters that will satisfy two requirements. First, lines and components must be preheated from room temperature to 1250°F before salt is introduced, and second, heat losses must be counterbalanced during periods of zero power operation. Electrical heaters of several types have been selected that will satisfy these requirements plus the remote-maintenance requirement of all components in the primary containment cells. Power input into the system from the heaters will be regulated by varying the voltage applied to the heating elements. Voltage regulation is to be provided by three-phase induction regulators presently installed in Building 7503. Metallic-sheathed, mineral-insulated cables will enter the cell and terminate in disconnects for each heating unit. End seals on both ends will prevent gas leakage through the cables. A typical line heating unit contains a ceramic heating element of resistance heating coils embedded in fused alumina. Embedding the coils in a ceramic material offers several advantages over an open coil design. Among these are a uniform release of heat and a more positive protection against a short to ground of the electrical conductor. The thermal insulation shown is a light-weight refractory fiber in felted form. The principal constituents of this fiber are alumina and silica. The heating element and the thermal insulation are contained in a metallic housing. The housing will contain particulate matter within the unit and will also provide a means by which tools can be attached to the unit for removal or installation. The unit is split on the center line. Attached to the clamshells are hinges, straps, and latches to secure the unit on the pipe. A similar unit can be fabricated for the pipe bends. In the reactor vessel heater, current is passed through 0.375 inch outer diameter 0.035 inch wall Inconel tubes. One hundred and twenty-six heater tubes are contained in sixty-three container tubes located around the vessel. The heater tubes are insulated from the containers by ceramic insulators. The heater tubes can be replaced without removing the thermal-neutron cover shield. To minimize heating in the cover-shield portion of the circuit, a transition is made from 0.375 inch tubing to 0.375 inch rod. Fourteen heating tubes are connected in series to form one leg of a three-phase Y electrical circuit. There are three of these circuits, with a combined capability of 30 kw. A 6 inch thickness of refractory-fiber thermal insulation encased in Inconel sheets is attached to the cylindrical walls and also to the top and bottom shielding. The cylindrical insulation is self-supporting from the cell floor. The fiber insulation is contained within Inconel sheets supported by the steel framework. The curved ceramic heating elements are contained within a framework similar to a picture frame. Each frame is a 100° segment that is removable from above. The top cover and the bottom contain insulation only. The fuel fill and drain tanks, as well as the hot-fuel storage tank, will have heaters similar to the flush-salt-tank heater. The housing is hinged on top to allow the unit to be opened. One half of the heater assembly is swung up and rests on top of the other half to allow the heating elements to be replaced from above. The ceramic heating elements are contained in frames for handling. The drain line from the reactor will be heated by the passage of approximately 675 amps at 19 volts through the pipe wall. This method of heating was selected because the drain line is approximately 55 feet long, has limited access from above, and would probably require 25 units if heated with individually removable heaters. All piping and components of the coolant-salt system that are located outside the containment vessel will be heated and insulated in a conventional manner since direct access for maintenance is possible. The radiator enclosure will be lined with flat ceramic heating elements with a capability of 60 kw. These units will be energized at all times, because without this precaution salt could freeze very quickly in the tubes in a loss-of-flow incident. Studies were made of the layout of the operating area, the design of the maintenance control room, the arrangement of the various concrete shielding blocks and the coverage of the cranes. As a result of this work, certain decisions were reached which determine the nature of the remote-maintenance tools that are being designed. Specifications have been completed for the single-arm manipulator, and others are being prepared for the shielding windows in the maintenance control room. Drawings of the molten salt reactor experiment model have been completed, and the model is currently being constructed. Necessary work was completed to support those who were preparing the preliminary proposal for the molten salt reactor experiment. Ten drawings concerning remote-handling tools have been released. An additional nine drawings covering special torqueing tools for flange assembly and disassembly are 95% complete. Efforts are now being concentrated on the layout of connection points for the various remotely operated tools, the necessary racks for storage of these tools, the arrangement of controls within the maintenance control room, and the design of jacks for separating the freeze flanges in the primary system. The design of the control and safety system was altered substantially from the original concept that the strong negative temperature coefficient in the fuel salt would provide complete reactor safety and stability. These alterations stemmed principally from hypothetical problems with the graphite. These hypothetical problems are fuel salt soak-up and retention in the 7% connected void space and xenon diffusion into the graphite. The reactivity changes expected from these mechanisms are gradual but will necessitate shimming. Fuel penetration into the graphite creates, but to a lesser degree, the xenon problem associated with solid-fuel reactors and also produces a power coefficient of reactivity. The power coefficient arises from the fact that the temperature coefficient of reactivity in the graphite is twice that of the fuel. For these reasons the molten salt reactor experiment will be equipped with an external control and safety system. Four poison tubes containing Li6F-Be2 salt are being considered as the means of providing shimming, safety, and control. This concept will be thoroughly tested before adoption. Three of the tubes will be used for shim-safety purposes and will have an individual worth of 44% reactivity when all other tubes are fully withdrawn. The combined worth, fully inserted, is 11% reactivity. Withdrawal speed will be limited to a safe value. The fourth tube will have a maximum worth of 1% reactivity and will be used for control purposes. Nuclear instrument channels for measurement, control, and safety will include two fission counter channels for startup and low-power operation, two log N channels covering the upper six decades of reactor power, and three independent power-level channels used solely for safety. The full range of reactor operations, from start-up to beyond design power, will be continuously monitored. The primary measurement of reactor power is by a measurement. Neutron-sensitive chambers will also provide continuous power readings and will be calibrated periodically by reference to the primary power instrumentation. Experience gained on the ARE and subsequent analog simulator studies show that automatic control of reactor power is a necessity in the low and medium power region. This is because small temperature changes represent large percentage changes in reactor power and because of the loose coupling between the radiator and the reactor. The automatic controller will utilize two inputs, heat power and the output from a neutron-sensitive ion chamber. The heat-power input is used for accurate power determinations and to reset periodically and automatically the ion chamber which will provide the necessary transient response. This system has been proposed for the EGCR and the Pebble-Bed Reactor Experiment. The radiator is the most sensitive component from the standpoint of system integrity, control of reactor power, and operational continuity. Salt freezing must not take place in the radiator. The vertically sliding doors which thermally isolate the radiator will automatically drop and electrical heat will be supplied if coolant-salt temperature, measured at the radiator, approaches the freezing point. This automatic door closure will be preceded by automatic blower shutoff and by opening the air flow bypass around the radiator. These safety actions are also automatic and will be produced by coolant-salt temperatures intermediate between the operating temperature and door-closure temperature. Modification of the former ARE-ART Building 7503 to adapt it for molten salt reactor experiment use involves fairly extensive changes to the building and services of various kinds within the building. The design work on all modifications will be done by ORNL. This engineering has attained a completely definitive and fairly advanced executional status in the past six months. Design involves at least three different categories of work. These include demolishing or removing currently installed extraneous items, making large-scale structural changes and adding new structures to the building, and modifying and installing current building services. Work is in progress, and some 36 items involving about 600 drawings are currently being worked on or are completed. The drawings are grouped into four packages associated with construction in reactor, radiator, and containment areas, drain-tank pits and maintenance control room, charcoal pit, filter pits and stack, retention pond, and miscellaneous building modifications. These packages will be completed in the order given above, with the last one scheduled to be finished by October 1961. The status of design drawings is such as to be consistent with this completion date. Effort will be maintained at the necessary level to assure meeting the design schedule. All requirements for shielding were established, and the load-bearing walls, which will also serve as biological shielding, were engineered. Loose aggregate, cooled by flowing water, will be used between the reactor cell and the secondary steel tank which encloses the reactor cell. The remote-maintenance control room is being engineered and detailed. This room must provide sufficient shielding to protect personnel from the high level of radiation emitted by components that have been used in the reactor. Engineering of the ventilation system, which ensures safe control of atmosphere during maintenance operations, has been completed. This includes specifications and sizing of fans, filters, ducting, etc. All water services, including cooling towers, demineralizers, and heat exchangers, were specified. The piping for the various systems has been laid out. Electrical services were specified, and the actual distribution system is partially drawn. Three separate power sources will be available for the building. There will be two 13.8 kilovolt service lines from separate 154 kilovolt TVA substations. In addition to these, there are three 300 kilowatt diesel power units to provide emergency power in case of power failure on both TVA lines. There remains no area of uncertainty on the site preparation, and every phase of building modification is now in design. All work is progressing satisfactorily and is essentially on schedule. Work required to build the molten salt reactor experiment will be accomplished in three phases. Phase I, which includes all demolition work and some minor alterations to the building, will be accomplished by a cost-plus-fixed-fee contractor. This decision is based on the fact that this work is a small portion of the entire job and can be accomplished under field direction without extensive engineering drawings. This phase is ready for release to a contractor. Phase II work will be accomplished by lump-sum contractors. It includes major modifications and additions to the reactor building: erection of additional shielding walls, extension of the reactor primary containment vessel, modification of drain tank and storage pits, modification of the radiator pit, and construction of the remote-maintenance control room. Also included are the waste storage pond, the off-gas system, the cooling tower for waste heat removal that is not reactor heat, and miscellaneous utilities. Phase III includes all work to be performed by ORNL personnel. Only critical work associated with the installation and instrumentation of the reactor complex is included in this phase. The installation of INOR-8 fuel and coolant systems will be made by Laboratory craftsmen experienced in working with special materials. Individual components such as pumps, heat exchangers, the reactor vessel, and various fuel and coolant tanks will be fabricated by outside vendors who are experienced in fabricating reactor components of special alloys. Specifications were written and engineering drawings were prepared for the major molten salt reactor experiment components. These drawings and specifications are being checked prior to sending them out to potential fabricators for bidding. In order to minimize the cost of qualifying welders and the cost of field inspection, an effort will be made to have all major components fabricated by a single vendor. Bidders will be requested to submit bids for the fabrication of a complete package of components consisting of the heat exchanger, the radiator, the reactor vessel, and fuel and coolant drain and storage tanks. Vendors will also be requested to submit bids on individual components. Under this option a vendor will be permitted to eliminate from his proposal any component he does not wish to fabricate. Design of a 6 inch freeze flange requiring no forced-air cooling and capable of withstanding loads imposed by the piping and internal pressure was completed. Photoelastic and mathematical analyses of the design indicate no significant stress concentrations exist and that the thermal stresses are not excessive. An Inconel flange is being fabricated in accordance with this design for temperature distribution measurements and for a check of flange behavior under thermal-cycling conditions. A request for quotation for furnishing two flanges fabricated from INOR-8 to this design was issued. These flanges will have double conical-gasket gas seals with a buffer annulus between the gaskets. The freeze-flange thermal-cycle facility was operated for 104 thermal cycles between 250 and 1350 degrees Fahrenheit with a 3.5 and 4 inch flange in the system. No evidence of thermal-fatigue cracking was found at the end of the test, although there was some flange distortion. Gas leakage was excessive during the cooldown portion of each thermal cycle when using a standard clamp ring with either a nickel-plated copper gasket or a gold-plated Inconel gasket. The seal was greatly improved by using a newly designed resilient clamp ring with either type of gasket. The lowest leakage rates were obtained by using the resilient clamp ring with a nickel-plated copper gasket. However, indications are that the copper gasket is forced deeper into the flange grooves with each thermal cycle and that the seal would eventually fail from this action. No cooling air was supplied to the 3.5 inch flange during one of the thermal cycles. The frozen-salt seal formed at a larger radius than during normal cycles, but was still sufficiently smaller than the gas-seal radius to ensure a reliable salt seal and to prevent contamination of the gas-seal gasket surfaces. A report was issued describing the 104-cycle operation and presenting the results obtained. A seal-test facility is being constructed to permit dry thermal-cycling of test flanges under more closely controlled conditions and with better leak detection than in the flowing-salt facility. Preheating is accomplished by clamshell heaters on the pipe stubs adjacent to the flange. The bore of the flange is heated by a silicon carbide bar heater located at the center line. These heaters will be time-controlled to permit completely automatic cycling. Leak detection will be accomplished by means of a mass-spectrometer type of leak detector connected to the buffer annulus of the gas seal. By flooding either the inside or the outside of the flange with helium, either of the gasket seals may be checked. Initially, two test flanges will be accommodated, with space provided for two additional stations to be added at a later date if the need arises. Two valves were fabricated and tested successfully for use in molten-salt drain systems. These valves are built of 1.5 inch Schedule-40 INOR-8 pipe crimped into flats, 0.5 inches thick by 2 inches long, in which a frozen plug is formed. Testing of the direct resistance-heated valve was terminated after completion of 100 freeze-thaw cycles, and the valve was removed for examination. Freezing was carried out at zero flow through the pipe. The average freeze time was 10 to 15 minutes, with 55 cubic feet per minute of air directed across the valve flat. Ten cubic feet per minute was required to maintain the plug after it was formed. The size of the plug was determined by the temperature of the salt above and below the flat and by the flow rate of cooling air. The average length of the plug was 3 inches. Thaw time varied from 2.5 minutes with a heat input of 3.5 kilowatts to 6 minutes at 1.75 kilowatts. Testing of the induction-heated valve was terminated after 60 cycles. Power input to the valve was 12 kilowatts at 450 kc. Melt time averaged 35 seconds, and freeze time averaged 10 minutes. 10 cubic feet per minute of air was required to keep the plug frozen. At the completion of the induction-heated test, the induction coil was removed and replaced by two 1 kilowatts, 24 inch long Calrods rated at 1500°F sheath temperature. The Calrods were bent into a 6 inch long W-shaped element and clamped onto the valveflat. The valve has been cycled 80 times without difficulty. Freeze time was again 10 to 15 minutes, with 10 cubic feet per minute of air required to maintain the plug. Melt time varied from 2.5 minutes at 2 kilowatts to 6 minutes at 0.8 kilowatts. The Calrod-heated valve was selected for use in the molten salt reactor experiment due to its simple electrical system. A prototype clamshell heater for use on the molten salt reactor experiment piping has been fabricated and is ready for testing. The heaters will be formed for the particular size and shape of pipe to be heated, with the requirement that they can be replaced with a remote manipulator. The molten salt reactor experiment core-vessel heaters, required to bring the vessel to operating temperature, are divided into replaceable sections each containing seven heaters. A full-scale mockup of one such section was built for testing. The setup includes 4 inches of Cerafelt insulation covered with a 0.031 inch Inconel reflector sheet between the heaters and the insulation. Both the functional and replacement characteristics of the heaters will be considered. The sampler-enricher system mechanism operates within a two-chambered, shielded dry box located on top of a shielding slab above and to one side of the reactor cell. A connecting tube joins the gas space of the fuel pump bowl to the dry box. The tube penetrates the containment vessel at a 45° angle. An operational valve and a metal freeze valve are used to isolate the sampler-enricher cell from the pump bowl. The drive mechanism for raising and lowering a capsule is located inside the inner compartment of the dry box. An outline of the procedure required to obtain a sample is as follows: A pretreated sample capsule, sealed in a gas-tight container, is lowered into the outer compartment of the dry box. Air is purged from the cell and replaced with helium. The door between the two compartments is opened, and the capsule is removed from the container and connected to a latch on the drive mechanism. With the door closed and operational and maintenance valves opened, the capsule is lowered into the pump tank to obtain the sample. The sample is raised into the dry box, and the operational valve is closed. Fission-product gases are purged from the inner compartment before the door is opened. After purging, the capsule is resealed in the gas-tight can and the door is closed. The can is then drawn into a shielded carrier. The addition of enriching salt follows a procedure similar to sampling. All operations performed inside the dry box are carried out using a one-armed manipulator. A periscope is used for viewing. A mockup of a drive mechanism, latch, sample capsule, connecting tube, latch stop, and capsule guide was constructed and tested. Some difficulty was encountered in preventing the drive cable, which lowers and raises the sample capsule, from jumping off the storage reel. Several alternative designs are under consideration. Two types of latches were given preliminary testing. The ball-type latch is easier to operate with a one-armed manipulator, while the shaft-type latch has a more positive locking action. Further testing on a more complete mockup will be required to fully compare the two latches. Equipment is being assembled to determine the optimal shape, material of construction, and pretreatment of the sample capsule. Since the latch will be operated remotely, it is highly desirable to keep frozen salt away from the parts which must be disengaged. Therefore a latch stop was designed to be located on top of the pump tank above the maximum operating level of the fuel salt. To reach the bottom of the pump tank, the capsule must extend 10 inches below the latch. This long assembly must have a flexible connection to move through the two 45° offsets in the connecting tube. To prevent the capsule from being washed around in the pump bowl by the turbulent flow of the salt, a guide cage was designed to fit inside the pump. The cage consists of five 0.25 inch INOR-8 rods with a stiffener ring to hold them in place. The estimated maximum temperature of the rods due to beta-gamma heating in the gas space is approximately 1700 degrees Farenheit. One design criterion for the sampler-enricher system requires that the components that are located outside the reactor cell be replaceable. A reliable valve must therefore be provided to prevent the escape of fission-product gases during such maintenance operations. A metal freeze valve is being developed for this application. It is expected that this valve would be closed only a few times during its life. An apparatus was constructed to test the feasibility of a metal freeze valve which operates by melting and refreezing a pool of solder. The wetted parts of a simulated 1 inch valve were fabricated from INOR-8, while the other parts were fabricated from stainless steel. A 72% silver, 28% copper solder with a melting point of 1434 degrees Fahrenheit was believed to have the desired wetting characteristics and thermal expansion properties when in contact with INOR-8. Since the valve was designed for service in a gas region, the compatibility of the solder with fluoride salt was not considered to be an important factor. Diffusion of constituents between the molten solder and INOR-8 may be a problem. A test cycle for the valve consisted of melting the solder, opening and closing the valve, and allowing the solder to refreeze. Oxygen was purged from the system before each cycle by evacuating the air and pressurizing the system with argon to about 1 pound per square inch gauge pressure. Even with repeated purgings, traces of oxygen remained in the system as evidenced by an adherent oxide film on all metal parts. No flux was added to the solder. The valve was operated successfully for 37 of the first 41 cycles. The leak rate through the seal was less than 10^-8 cubic centimeters of helium per second at a pressure differential of 30 pounds per square inch across the valve. Failures occurred during cycles 1, 2, l2, and 17. During the first two cycles, when the maximum solder temperature was 1455 and 1471°F, respectively, the gas seal was not tight. By increasing the temperature to 1500°F and holding it there for 15 min or longer, a gas-tight seal could be formed reproducibly in the subsequent cycles. The other two leaks resulted from failure to lower the valve cap deep enough into the pool of solder. This will be corrected in the molten salt reactor experiment valve by a positioning device. During the 41 cycles, the solder was at 1500°F or above for 73 hours. When a gas-tight seal failed to form during the next two cycles, the test was terminated and the valve was opened for inspection. The ridges at the top of the solder region are primarily metal oxides, resulting from incomplete removal of oxygen from the system. This difficulty should not occur in the reactor. Chemical analysis of the solder before and after testing revealed that significant amounts of nickel, chromium, and iron had been picked up during the test. However, despite these changes in composition, there was no detectable change in the melting point. Failure of the valve resulted from insufficient solder in the cup. Some of the solder was lost due to improper procedures during the initial melting, and some was lost due to oxidation. Since the valve was designed as a maintenance valve, it was expected to have a shorter service life than the period of successful operation. A similar valve was fabricated of Inconel. The 72% silver 28% Copper solder failed to wet the Inconel at 1500°F. Subsequent tests confirmed that INOR-8 will be wet but Inconel will not be wet by Ag-Cu solder at 1500°F in a hydrogen atmosphere. The one-fifth-scale model of the molten salt reactor experiment core was used to determine the proper circumferential orifice distribution between the constant-flow-area volute and the core-wall cooling annulus. The principal objective of the orifice distributor is to attain uniformity of flow to the annulus. Measurements were made at design flow rate and at 40% of the design flow rate. Note that at the design flow rate, the velocity suddenly increases from approximately 14 feet per second in the inlet pipe to approximately 23 feet per second in the volute head. This is because of recirculation of fluid around the volute. Flow distribution from the volute to the annulus is proportional to the velocity gradient at any point around the volute, and it can be seen that within the limits of experimental error it is constant in the model. As the fluid leaves the volute region and moves down the core-wall cooling annulus, the swirl component of velocity decreases therefore the resultant total velocity drops. The lowest total velocity is at the bottom of the annulus and was measured to be 4.2 feet per second. Further, it was found to be constant within the limits of experimental error all the way around the reactor. This velocity gives a Reynolds number of approximately 20,000 and a resultant heat transfer coefficient of over 1000 Btu/hr-ft2-F, which is more than adequate for core-wall cooling. Residence times were measured in the lower head of the one-fifth-scale model by a salt-conductivity technique. It appears that the highest fluid temperature in the lower head, which is next to the wall and at the vessel center line, will be less than 20 degrees Fahrenheit above the mixed-mean temperature in the lower head. Design work is continuing on a full-scale flow model of the core but construction has not yet started. A test unit was designed and constructed to evaluate titanium, uranium, and other materials for use as high-temperature oxygen getters. The data obtained from this test unit will be used as a guide in designing the oxygen removal units for the cover-gas system. The test unit will be operated in conjunction with an oxygen analyzer currently under development. If successful, the analyzer will read oxygen concentrations in the range of 0 to 1 parts per million. Because the proposed modifications to Building 7503 will not provide complete biological shielding when the roof plugs are removed from atop the reactor cell or drain-tank cell, it has been decided to adopt a dual maintenance philosophy that will permit working directly through the shielding when possible or remotely controlling the manipulator from a shielded maintenance control room whenever removal of all the cell shielding is required for an operation. The lower roof plugs will be subdivided into units 2 feet wide by a length determined by the width of each of the five bays. A portable, steel maintenance shield that can cover the opening left by the removal of two adjacent plugs will be provided for semidirect work. Maintenance that requires a larger opening will be accomplished by removing all the cell shielding and using the manipulator-television complex. At such time, the shielded maintenance control room may be the only portion of the building suitable for long-term occupancy. Designs for cell shielding and component layout are being made in accordance with dual philosophy requirements. Electrical and instrument disconnect designs, auxiliary piping disconnects, and smaller components such as pipe heaters, vessel heaters, and pumps and motors are taking advantage of the ability to use several hands in a semidirect maintenance approach. As previously reported, the remote-maintenance development facility was operated at 1200 degrees Fahrenheit with molten salt and then disassembled and reassembled to demonstrate fully remote maintenance. Before a second salt run could be made to complete the demonstration, it was necessary to improve the heating of the fill-and-drain line, particularly near a pair of flanges and at a freeze valve. This involved adding and rearranging heaters, and channeling the cooling air to the freeze valve to localize the freeze plug. After these changes were made, the system was heated to between 1200 and 1250 degrees Fahrenheit in 73 hours, and salt was circulated for 4.5 hours. The system was then drained and permitted to cool. These operations were conducted with no difficulty. Remote disassembly and reassembly were performed on the pump, the pump motor, the reactor assembly, and the heat exchanger. Part of this work was accomplished by new operators in training, and with new techniques. Although a completely remote operation could have been performed by an experienced operator, the actual operation included some direct vision as an aid to the trainees. The television cameras required a considerable amount of repair, as original parts wore out. Moving parts of future cameras should be of higher quality. After the facility was operated and remotely disassembled, it was dismantled and removed from the area. Various component and assembly mockups of the molten salt reactor experiment have been designed, are in various stages of construction, and will be installed in the area. A portable-shield mockup is being constructed for installation on the manipulator bridge. Tooling suitable for semi-direct work will be developed and tested in use with this shield. A mockup of the primary pump with holddown-bolt and jack-bolt extensions and auxiliary pipe stubs has been constructed and will be set in the area. A mockup of a pipe run with freeze flange and pipe supports has been designed and is being constructed. It will be used primarily for the development of equipment for remotely separating and closing the freeze flanges while maintaining the required precise alignment, and secondarily for the development of closures and tools for replaceable pipe heaters. The total mock-up ultimately will be completed in the Molten Salt Reactor Experiment Building. The detailed design of several tools for use with the portable maintenance shield has been completed, and construction has begun. The tools will be tested in the remote-maintenance facility and will become part of the molten salt reactor experiment tool inventory. Detailed design of tools for use with the manipulator is also in progress. A one-twelfth-scale model of Building 7503 is being designed and constructed. It will be a functional model to aid in design, construction, and maintenance of the molten salt reactor experiment. The reactor cell containing the reactor with its associated heaters and shield, the pump, the heat exchanger, and fuel and coolant piping has been completed. It has been decided to eliminate freeze flanges from the salt system of the drain tank cell. The salt system will be of all-welded construction. In the event a component must be replaced, the 0.5 inch and 1.5 inch salt piping will be cut and the replacement component joined to the system by a brazed joint. It is necessary to develop mechanical equipment for remotely cutting the pipe, cleaning, aligning the joint, heating in the proper atmosphere, and inspecting the final product. Many pipe and tube disconnects are required on molten salt reactor experiment auxiliary lines to permit replacement of components. Included in the auxiliary lines are lubricating oil, helium, air, etc. Generally, specifications require that leak rates for the mechanical joints be less than 10-8 std cubic centimeters of helium per second as tested by a mass spectrometer. System pressures will vary between 20 and 200 pounds per square inch absolute and temperatures between 75 and 1000 degrees Fahrenheit. Materials used in disconnects must be able to withstand radiation doses of 10^10 rads. Initially, disconnects were desired which could easily be operated remotely by a one-armed manipulator. Since the adoption of the dual-maintenance concept, it has been decided to use helium-buffered ring-joint flanges as disconnects. These can very easily be broken and remade through the portable shield, and can if necessary be maintained with the manipulator. Prior to the decision to use ring-joint flanges, which are not expected to require any development, several promising disconnects were evolved. These types were subjected to pressure-cycling in steam, temperature cycling between 200 and 1000 degrees Farenheit in air, and make-break cycles. The most promising disconnect for use on radioactive lines is the spring-ring joint. This is essentially a tongue-and-groove joint which seals at two concentric line contacts with a helium buffer or leak-detector region between the two sealing surfaces. For nonradioactive lines, the cone-seat disconnect may be used. Here the male cone is clamped into the female recess, compressing the cone sufficiently to form a seal but limiting the stress below the yield point of the metal. In addition to the single disconnects, multiple cone-seat disconnects were tested successfully. Another multiple disconnect that appeared promising was a ring-joint flange with manifold parts and a number of concentric Flexitallic gasket seals. The operation of long-term forced-circulation corrosion test loops, eight of INOR-8 and two of Inconel, was concluded during this period. Where loops had sections removed for metallurgical examination prior to final termination, this is noted in the table. All loops operated normally during this period until termination. At the conclusion of the forced-circulation corrosion test program for the molten salt reactor experiment, the operating experience of the 25 pump loops is summarized as follows. The 25 loops operated for a total of 289483 hours at test conditions, with 20 of the 25 operating for at least one year. The 9 loops of Inconel operated an average of one year each. The 16 loops of INOR-8 accumulated a total of 24 years of operation. Of the 25 loops, 18 were shut down for examination as scheduled, and 7 were shut down prematurely because of mechanical failures. The seven breakdowns may be classified as follows: Four cases of improper operator procedure in thawing frozen salt lines, causing pipe breaks One case of improper maintenance procedure, causing a tubing failure during a maintenance operation One case of continual malfunction of the pump clutch, leading to excessive maintenance cost and one case of material failure in a machined INOR-8 fitting. The graphite stringers of the molten salt reactor experiment core are to be restrained by molybdenum bands. It is desirable to demonstrate experimentally that graphite and molybdenum are compatible in a fuel-salt environment. Two test sections, incorporating graphite, molybdenum, and INOR-8, were designed and fabricated for testing in molten-salt thermal-convection loops. The test sections were installed in two INOR-8 thermal-convection loops fabricated of 0.375 inch schedule 10 INOR-8. The test sections consist of a number of graphite units 6 inches long encased in a 1,25 inch schedule 40 INOR-8 pipe section and mounted in the hot leg of the thermal-convection loops. The first test section placed in operation consisted of two graphite units, and the second consisted of four units. The salt-to-graphite volume ratios of the two loops is approximately 2 to 1 and 1 to 1, respectively. The graphite units were machined from type ROO25 graphite, a low-permeability grade produced by National Carbon Company. The molybdenum was cut into strips 0.0625 inch thick, 0.125 inch wide, and 6 inches long. The strips were bent into the shape shown in the drawing to provide spring force contact against the graphite in the slots and against the INOR-8 spacer sleeves inserted at the ends. Six molybdenum strips were placed in each graphite unit. The flow passage through the center of the graphite has the same diameter as the loop piping. The first loop test, with two graphite units, began operation in October 1960, and the second loop, with four units, began operation in December 1960. The salt mixture used was the designated molten salt reactor experiment fuel salt. In preparation for filling with salt, the loops were evacuated at room temperature and slowly brought up to 1140°F. They were held at this temperature for 16 hours and brought up to 1300°F while the vacuum was maintained. The system was held at 1300°F for another 16 hours before being filled with a salt. The first fill was circulated for 2 hours and then replaced with the operating salt. Design, water testing, and thermal analysis of the molten salt reactor experiment fuel pump received emphasis during the report period. Contracts were signed for obtaining pump impeller-and-volute combinations of cast INOR-8. Procurement was initiated for pump drive motors and variable-frequency supply. Fabrication of equipment for the fuel-pump water test was completed, and tests were performed on priming, fountain flow, coastdown characteristics, head-flow-speed characteristics, and the effectiveness of the xenon-removal stripper. The test facility consists of a closed loop constructed of 6 inch pipe. The loop contains a venturi flowmeter, a throttle valve, and an orifice flow restrictor. Provisions are available for measuring head, flow, speed, pump input power, and temperature. The hydraulic design of the test pump and that of the reactor fuel pump are identical. Priming tests were conducted in which the pump was accelerated from 0 to 1030 rotations per minute in approximately 30 seconds, while noting changes in pump-tank liquid level and observing attainment of normal pump-head and flow performance. Normal hydraulic performance was achieved by the end of pump acceleration for all runs except the one with a 0.5 inch starting level, which required approximately an additional minute. These data should not be used for reactor-system computations unless differences in volumes of system trapped gas are accounted for. The behavior of the fountain flow was observed over a wide range of operating conditions and found to be in the desired direction, outward from the shaft annulus into the pump tank. In particular, the resistance lines through 45 and 55 feet of head at 1450 gallons per minute were traversed satisfactorily over the speed range of 700 to 1300 rotations per minute. Coastdown tests were performed to determine the time required for the pump motor to stop after the drive motor was disconnected from the electric supply. Tests were performed on the same flow-resistance line for operating speeds of coastdown times ranged from 10.1 to 10.4 seconds. Elapsed times for flow reduction to 540 gallons per minute ranged from 1.5 to 2.0 seconds. Performance data were obtained over a wide range of operating conditions. These data cover the range of 27 to 70 feet of head and 750 to 1,700 gallons per minute of flow. The bypass flow into the pump tank for these data was 50 gallons per minute measured at 1,450 gallons per minute and 1,030 rotations per minute. The effectiveness of various xenon-removal stripper configurations was investigated for throughputs up to 35 gallons per minute. These investigations were conducted with distilled water initially supersaturated with carbon dioxide. By monitoring the potential of hydrogen of the water, the time to reduce the concentration of dissolved carbon dioxide gas by a factor of 2 was measured. The time required for an ideal 100% effective stripper was computed to be 1.9 minutes, and times of 2.2 minutes were measured for several stripper configurations at 35 gallons per minute throughputs. A stripper configuration has been placed in the water stand for testing at throughputs from 50 to 70 gallons per minute. The design of the hot-test prototype of the fuel pump has been completed and the pump is approximately 50% fabricated. The Xenon removal stripper in this design has not yet been completed. Contracts were signed for the production of impeller-volute combinations made of cast INOR-8. Samples of the first casting or from the first-casting melt were requested for weldability tests to be conducted at ORNL. Pump-tank heads for INOR-8 were fabricated by hot spinning. Dye-penetrant inspection revealed so many imperfections that it was necessary to redesign the prototype pump tank to utilize acceptable portions of the formed heads. Specifications for the drive motor for the fuel pump and for the coolant pump were written. Specifications for the fuel-pump drive motor were revised to incorporate water cooling and both specifications were submitted for procurement. Specifications for the variable-frequency power supply for the fuel-pump drive motor were written, and the low bidder was awarded the contract. The conversion of an existing sodium potassium pump test facility to circulate molten salt has been completed. The pump has been in operation continuously for 3720 hours, pumping LiF-BeF2-ThF4-UF4 at 1225 degrees Fahrenheit, 1950 rotations per minute, and 510 gallons per minute. The upper and lower seal oil leakage rates have averaged 10 and 13.5 cubic centimeters per day respectively. An experiment utilizing radioactive Krypton-85 as a tracer gas has been planned for this pump to determine the extent of back diffusion of fission gases in the pump shaft annulus from the gas space in the pump tank to the region of the lower oil seal. A radiation safety review of the experiment was completed, and the design was revised to provide additional safety. The experiment fabrication is complete. After calibration of the instruments, the experiment will be connected to the PK-P loop for testing. The most severe thermal stresses in the pump tank have been found to occur in the cylindrical neck at the junctions with the torispherical shell and the pump-tank flange. The high stresses are caused by the high overall temperature differences between the hot end and the cold end of the cylinder, high thermal gradients, and rapid changes in thermal gradient. Temperature distributions in the pump tank and shield plug were determined for several operating conditions by the Generalized Heat Transfer code. From these temperature distributions, it was concluded that controlled cooling on the torispherical head would be required to maintain the pump tank within acceptable temperature limits and to aid in reducing thermal stresses in the cylindrical portion of the pump tank. Temperature profiles were estimated for the cylindrical portion of the pump tank and the volute support for several degrees of cooling of the torispherical shell. A metal temperature of 1000 degrees Fahrenheit at the junction of the spherical head and the cylinder and an assumed reasonable temperature profile produced the following thermal bending stresses. These thermal bending stress were, at the volute, 5308 pounds per square inch at the sphere-neck junction, 16,900 pounds per square inch at the top flange, 24,000 pounds per square inch. These stresses must be combined with pressure stresses to obtain the maximum principal stresses. Revised general heat transfer code input data have been calculated and machine calculations are currently in progress to determine the temperature distributions more precisely under several operating conditions. The general heat transfer temperature distributions in the cylindrical neck and volute support and in the torispherical head are shown in the liquid level and the spherical shell is caused by the presence of windows in the lower portion of the volute support, which increases the thermal resistance to removal of the nuclear deposited heat in the volute support. This temperature is believed to be excessive, and further refinements in the geometry and calculation procedures are being made to reduce the peak temperature and gradients. Mechanical, electrical, and instrumentation designs for the fuel-pump hot-test stand were completed, and fabrication has started. The test facility consists of a closed loop constructed of 6-inch Inconel pipe. The loop contains a venturi flowmeter, a flow straightener, and an orifice flow restrictor. The orifice is located in a freeze flange and is replaceable for purposes of varying the system flow resistance. The system will be equipped with provisions for measuring head, flow, pump speed, pump input power, and system temperatures. The loop is equipped with a cooler section for assistance in temperature control. The loop will contain the necessary preheaters and thermal insulation. The pump tank and all the pump wetted parts will be constructed of INOR-8. The pump support will simulate the support proposed for use in the reactor. The pump tank has provisions for testing the liquid-level indicators proposed for reactor use. The design of the coolant-pump water test is essentially complete. The tests will be used to determine the hydraulic performance of the pump and to determine the feasibility of conducting the coolant-pump hot tests in the fuel-pump volute. Drawings have been released and fabrication has started for the first series of tests, which will evaluate the operating characteristics of the coolant-pump impeller in the fuel-pump volute. The pump containing one salt-lubricated journal bearing continued in operation circulating Lif-BeF2-UF4 at 1225 degrees Fahrenheit, 1200 rotations per minute and 75 gallons per minute. The pump has now operated for 7440 hours and has been stopped and started 72 times. There has been no discernible leakage of oil from the shaft seal. The small frozen-lead-sealed pump failed December 20, 1960, after 22,000 hours of operation. It had operated continuously until the shaft jammed and stalled the small fractional-horsepower motor drive. The 0.1875 inch shaft parted during attempts to free it, and the test was terminated. The pump was removed from the loop and cut open. The left half is shown as-cut. The right half shows the barrel and shaft with the lead and salt removed. The lower half of the pump barrel consisted of a porous, reddish-brown mixture of nickel and lead oxide. The corrosion of the Inconel barrel is visible to the eye to be over 0.125 inch deep at the point indicated. Approximately 0.0625 inch of the 0.1875 inch shaft remains at this level. The shaft had also been eroded, apparently by the abrasiveness of the oxide at the frozen-seal area. The shaft parted at this point when attempts were made to free it before shutdown. Further investigation will be made of the materials in the pump. Design and fabrication of the 1.5-inch Inconel system for the engineering test loop was completed during the reporting period. The piping is now complete, and instruments are being installed. The loop is situated above and below the track floor of Building 9201-3. Although this figure shows freeze flanges and a graphite container, the first test will be operated with 1.5 inch pipe throughout. The drain line, dual freeze valves, and drain tanks are below the floor level. The reservoirs shown on the vertical risers from each freeze valve are for the purpose of retaining sufficient salt on draining of the loop to form a frozen plug. The DANA pump bowl and support are shown to the right, with the shielding and inlet-pipe support to the left. In the right foreground is the access to the drain-tank area below the floor level. In conjunction with the sampler-enricher system, a capsule guide and retainer was fabricated and installed on the lid of the DANA pump bowl lid. The sampler-enricher system will be mocked up and attached to the tube at a later date. Provisions are also included on the pump bowl for a manual salt sampler and a differential-pressure type of level indicator. The first hot tests to be conducted with the loop will determine the time required to reach equilibrium oxygen concentration during the flushing operation with salt and will determine the operational characteristics of the dual freeze valves. The insulation for most sheathed thermocouple wire is chemically hygroscopic; consequently, the sheath must be made hermetically tight. A liquid sealant for sheathed thermocouple wire is commercially available, but will not meet the specifications for a reactor-grade product. The liquid sealant is unsatisfactory because of the effects of radiation and high-temperature damage. Moreover, this sealant cannot be applied in the field since a furnace is needed to heat the sheathed thermocouple before the sealant is applied. This process takes approximately 8 hours. The following is an installation procedure for an end-seal assembly with a 0.125 inch outer diameter oxide-insulated sheathed thermocouple, that can be installed in the field. The seal consists of the seal holder and the cable end bell. The seal is hermetic when installed according to the following procedures. Step 1 is to remove the sheath material and oxide insulation to expose the electrodes, making certain the sheath material and electrode have not been electrically shorted. Step 2 is to attach the cable end bell to the sheath by soldering, brazing, or welding, whichever suits the intended application. Step 3 is to insert the electrode through the seals. Step 4 is to engage the electrode holder with the attached end bell and seal this joint as the end bell was attached to the sheath. Step 5 is to seal the electrode to the seals by soldering. The seal should then be tested by the following technique. Step 1 is to jig the thermocouple in an assembly that can be pressurized with helium to 100 psi. Step 2 is to leave the seal in the pressurized jig for 1 hour. Step 3 is to remove the pressure. Step 4 is to pour acetone in the jig. Bubbles in the acetone indicate a leak in the seal. Step 5 is to repair all leaks and proceed from step 1. The use of two-wire single-conductor sheathed thermocouples is being proposed for the molten salt reactor experiment. The problems associated with two-conductor cables also apply to single-conductor cables. The attachment of a single-conductor end seal is similar to that of a two-conductor end seal. The sheath material for the thermocouple wire can be stainless steel, aluminum, copper, iron, Inconel, INOR-8, or some other material. Aluminum-sheathed cables are more difficult to seal than other materials. Inconel or INOR-8 will be used for the sheath material in most molten salr reactor experiment applications. The plug and jack are fabricated from Electrobestos, which can be purchased from numerous manufacturers. This assembly is designed for use in a nuclear environment at elevated temperatures. The multithermocouple disconnect is operated by a straight-line push-pull motion, with alignment being accomplished by the aid of guide pins of different diameters. The guide pins also act as a polarizing key for the disconnect. The unit has been operated very satisfactorily in the remote-maintenance demonstration facility. The basic unit as shown can be modified to accommodate as many thermocouples as the user might require. For the molten salt reactor experiment, the basic four-thermocouple unit will be used and will be modified for two and eight thermocouples. This unit is fabricated from Unistrut, Unistrut fittings, and Electrobestos plugs and jacks for an elevated-temperature nuclear environment. Approximately 50 pounds of force is required to operate the basic four-thermocouple unit. This electrical disconnect for three-phase power operation has an electrical rating of 40 amp, three phase, 600 v ac; a similar unit has a rating of 70 amps, three phase, 600 volt alternating current. Both were designed for remote handling and a nuclear radiation environment. Inorganic materials are used in their fabrication. The metallic parts are aluminum and silicon bronze, and the insulating materials are porcelain and lava. The units are operated by a straight-line push-pull motion with a force of less than 25 pounds required for operation. Intended for nonpolarized balanced-load service, they can be polarized by the addition of a guide key. Both units have been tested in the remote-maintenance demonstration facility and are easily operated. The units will be fabricated by an outside manufacturer in accordance with Oak Ridge National Laboratory designs and specifications. A 150-amp, three-phase, 600-volt alternating disconnect of construction and design similar to the two above is being considered for use in the molten salt reactor experiment for pumps and tank heaters. A prototype instrument disconnect, with a maximum rating of 100 volts alternating or direct current is being developed for use in the molten salt reactor experiment. The unit is fabricated from inorganic components; the insulating material is fired lava and the housing is aluminum. The unit is self-polarizing due to the conical electrode holder. It is not designed to be disconnected while energized. A four-conductor sheathed electrical cable will be used for the power to this disconnect. A power disconnect of similar construction is being fabricated for 90-amp, three-phase, 480-volt alternating current service and should be ready for testing within 60 days. Molten salt reactor experiment instrumentation requirements include measuring the level of molten salt in the fuel and coolant-salt pump bowls, over a 5-inch range. In order to make this measurement, a level-sensing device is required that can operate at 1200 degrees Farenheit in an intense radiation field consisting of gamma-rays, neutrons, and beta particles. Some considerations affecting the selection of the level-sensing element are: containment of the molten salt and cover gas, corrosion, temperature and pressure effects on the zero and range of the instrument, long-term material damage from temperature and radiation, possible effects of ZrF4 snow accumulations, gamma and beta heating effects on materials in the gas space, simplicity of construction, and compatibility with commercially available receiving instruments. A further restriction is the relatively low electrical conductivity of the fuel and coolant salts. A number of level-measuring techniques were considered, but no currently available device was suitable for molten salt reactor experiment use without some development. While several types of level devices offered possibilities of successful development, the ballfloat type used on the aircraft reactor experiment and further developed by Southern offered the greatest possibility of success with the least development. The major problems associated with development of the ball-float sensor are the design of the float and the design of the position-sensing coil and core assembly. The design of the float was the first problem considered. Two types of floats are being designed. The float used in the fuel system must withstand the high temperature of the fuel salt and the still higher temperature caused by beta heating. A solid graphite float is being designed for this service. The submerged portion of the float will be cylindrical, and the unsubmerged portion will be spherical. Calculations show that the density difference between graphite and the fuel salt is sufficient to produce the desired excess buoyancy when allowance is made for absorption of fuel salt in the graphite. The solid graphite float cannot be used in the coolant-salt system because the density of the coolant salt is too low. The float in the coolant salt will not be subjected to beta heating, however, and a hollow INOR-8 ball float can be used. The position of the float will be detected by measuring the position of an iron core, suspended below the float inside a containment tube. A differential transformer located outside the containment tube will detect the position of the core through the nonmagnetic wall of the containment tube. The core will be clad with INOR-8 for corrosion protection. The differential transformer was selected because of its position-sensing device in preference to the taper-core; it is compatible with commercially available receiving instruments; the core weight is lower; and the cylindrical configuration of the core eliminates the need for guide bushings. The high temperature at which the differential transformer operates presents several problems. The conducting and insulating materials in the transformer windings must maintain their physical and electrical characteristics at the exposure temperatures and radiation levels for periods longer than the longest expected period of reactor operation. Also, the inherent decrease in insulation resistivity with temperature must not affect the transmitted signal. Silver was originally considered for the wire material, but because of grain growth of silver at the operating temperature, other materials, including platinum, are now being considered. The insulation problem is being attacked from two directions. First, low-impedance windings will be used. This will permit the use of heavy-gage ceramic-coated wire and will reduce the effect of changes in the resistivity of the insulation on the transmitted signal. Second, the available insulating materials are being investigated to determine which will best meet our needs. The usual ceramics are available, and a newer material, Flourmica, may be applicable. One Flourmica sample has been submitted to the Solid State Division for evaluation. Another sample of a different type will be submitted as soon as it arrives. A low-temperature mockup of the differential transformer with a desired 5-inch range has been constructed and tested. The sensitivity was approximately 40 millivolts per Volt-inch, with deviation from linearity less than 2%. The transformer consists of two single-layer windings, each with 436 turns of number 24 American wire gauge wire and 10 inches in length. The secondary has the conventional differential arrangement, except that half the turns are wound in one direction and half in the other, with no breaks or connections in the wire. The primary is one continuous coil wound in one direction. This transformer will be developed further to incorporate high-temperature wires and insulating materials, and additional tests will be made at temperature. A test stand for testing prototypes of the level device at high temperature and in molten salt is now in the design stage. The fuel salt and coolant salt for the molten salt reactor experiment are contained in four tanks. Two tanks are for the fuel used during normal operation, one tank is for fuel used to flush the system, and one tank is for the coolant salt. The weight of fluid in these tanks is measured by individual weighing systems that provide a continuous indication of the amount and level of fluid in each tank. For a given weight of fluid in a tank, the depth of the fluid can be calculated, and this calculation can be checked by measurement if the measurement is made prior to the time the reactor starts normal operation. With this level information available, the calibration of the weighing system can be checked if one or more fluid levels can be determined accurately. In the past, the spark-plug probe has been used to give a positive indication of a single fluid level. This device is very accurate and will provide a level indication that can be used to calibrate a weighing system. Unfortunately, the spark-plug probe has an insulator to support and insulate the center electrode, which becomes a part of the containment vessel. The seal between the metal housing and the ceramic insulator of the spark plug is not leak-tight and will not contain the gases in the system. Also, the insulator inside the container accumulates material from the vapor in the container, which short-circuits it. For these reasons, the use of a spark-plug probe or any device that requires an insulator as a part of the containment vessel cannot be tolerated. As there is no similar device which will provide single-point level indication, development of a single-point probe or level device became necessary. During the ANP program considerable work was done on the evaluation of liquid metal level transducers. A probe was designed to replace the spark plug. This basic design is the one around which the development is centered. The probe was designed to be used in sodium potassium, which has a high electrical conductivity. The molten fluorides, on the other hand, have a very low conductivity, which makes changes in the design necessary. The original design used the change in voltage across the probe, when sodium potassium came in contact with the end of the probe, to operate a relay. As sodium potassium is a good conductor, there is a large current change, which results in a voltage change sufficiently large to operate a relay. With the molten salt reactor experiment molten fluoride mixture, the change in current flow is relatively small so a signal transformer is inserted in series with the excitation transformer and the probe. The output of the signal transformer is used as the desired signal. By keeping the voltage drop in the circuit external to the probe a very small fraction of the voltage drop across the probe, the small resistance change that takes place when molten salt touches the probe results in a usable signal from the signal transformer. With the present probe the maximum signal change is about 5%. Although detectable, this signal change is not large enough for normal use. The probe now being used consists of a 0.625 inch Inconel tube with two ceramic-bead-insulated number 18 silver wires run down the center and welded to the contact end of the probe. The molten-salt container in which the first tests were made with this device is being modified to make it more useful. The probe design is also to be changed. With these changes, the development program for the device will have three major phases. One will be to continue work on the probe and the associated electrical excitation and readout system. Another will be a continuation of the work done by Greene on the conductivity of molten fluorides. The third will be a program to determine the cause of what seems to be the polarization of electrical probes inserted in the salt even when excited with high-frequency alternating current voltages. This polarization was mentioned by Greene and by Hyland in his work on molten-salt level devices. Three sets of survey calculations were performed, using the current molten salt reactor experiment fuel-salt composition and basic core design. In the first set, the core was assumed to be a single region consisting of a homogeneous mixture of graphite and fuel salt, with various volume fractions of salt. In the second, the core was divided into two or three regions having different volume fractions of fuel salt and graphite. In the third set, the core was made up of fuel salt and a reflector of moderator material and in some of these cases a central moderator region was also considered. All calculations were done with the multigroup diffusion-theory program called "GNU-II" on International Business Machine's model 704 computer. It should be noted that while some reduction in circulating system inventory was obtained, the effect of subdividing the core was slight. It is possible to obtain a wide range of power shapes. For the third set of calculations on reflected reactors, in order to achieve a critical uranium concentration in the salt as low as 0.2 to 0.3 mole percent it was necessary to utilize an island reflector of beryllium or beryllium oxide. The control-tube-worth calculations were done in x-y geometry using the IBM-704 program PDQ^2 with two groups. For the purposes of these calculations, actual cylindrical tubes were replaced by square tubes of cross-sectional area equal to the cylindrical tubes. Two-group constants derived from multigroup calculations were used for the core and empty tube regions; the full tubes were assumed to be black to thermal neutrons but to have the same fast-group cross sections as the empty tubes. A total worth of 11% change in reactivity was obtained for four tubes, when these tubes were symmetrically placed 4 inches from the vertical axis of the core. Additional calculations were performed using the two group r-z geometry International Business Machines "Equipoise" program to obtain estimates for the reactivity worth of the tubes as a function of the height of the poison fluid. Since r-z geometry was used in this calculation, the four tubes were replaced by a ring; this ring had the same surface-to-volume ratio as did the tubes. The calculational results were normalized to the 11% result obtained from PDQ. As an alternative to the present molten salt reactor experiment design, it has been proposed to can the core graphite by means of an INOR-8 calandria, with fuel salt flowing through tubes. Preliminary nuclear calculations have been made, assuming the core of the reactor to consist of a homogeneous mixture of fuel, graphite, and INOR-8, with a nominal fuel volume fraction of 0.08. Estimates were made of the gamma-ray source strengths and some of the resulting biological shield requirements for the molten salt reactor experiment. In addition, the change in shield thickness required for a tenfold change in the dose rate is specified and is applicable over the range of at least one-tenth to ten times the given dose rate. Too large of an extrapolation in either direction will give a low estimate. In order to decrease the dose rate above the top plugs to permissible levels, a thicker shield or better shield material is required. An estimate of the residual activity in the INOR-8 piping of the coolant-salt system due to activation by photoneutrons after one year's operation at 10 megawatts gave less than 1 millirad an hour at a distance of 6 inches from the piping. The photoneutrons are produced by the Beryllium nine to Beryllium eight gamma-neutron reaction in the coolant salt. The 24 forced-convection loops programmed to evaluate the corrosion rates of "INOR-8" or Inconel in fused fluoride mixtures have now completed operation. Five operated for more than two years and 19 for one to two years. Eight loops are now being examined. Metallographic examination of "INOR-8" forced-convection loop Molten Salt Reactor Program number 12, which temperature of 1300 degrees Fahrenheit, revealed no manifestation of attack except the development of a thin surface layer and slight depletion of second-phase material below the exposed surface. The salt was sampled frequently during circulation in this loop so that chromium buildup could be monitored as a function of operating time. The samples revealed a slight increase in chromium concentration from an initial value of about 450 parts per million to a level of 500 parts per million after 1200 hours. Within a spread of 60 parts per million, this level remained constant throughout the test. The concentrations of nickel and iron remained at 60 plus or minus 20 parts per million and 210 plus or minus 70 parts per million, respectively, during the test. A somewhat higher rate of corrosion was incurred by the INOR-8 loop, which circulated a fluoride mixture containing a 20 mole percent uranium fluoride concentration. As discussed previously, operation of this loop was terminated after 8085 hours when a pump failure and subsequent startup caused a rupture of the cooling coil. Metallographic examination of specimens removed from both heater legs and the unheated bend connecting the two legs revealed concentrated attack in the form of surface roughening and pitting to a maximum depth of one and one half thousandths of an inch. The cold-leg sections revealed only moderate surface roughening however, examination of the cold-leg specimens did reveal a small number of magnetic metal crystals loosely adherent to the cold-leg wall. Results of chemical analyses of these deposits are not yet available. A sampling probe was used in this loop experiment to determine the buildup of chromium in the salt as a function of operating time. Samples of the salt showed an increase in chromium concentration from an initial level of 160 parts per million to a final level of 1730 parts per million. The concentration of iron increased from an initial level of 175 parts per million to a final level of 475 parts per million. The nickel concentration, which was abnormally high at the start of the test, decreased to a level of 100 parts per million. The uranium concentration remained relatively constant during the test. The chromium concentration, when plotted as a function of test time, was found to closely approximate a function of the type "e" to the power of "k" times "t". Such a time dependence is typical of reactions whose overall rate increases as the concentration of reaction products increases. It is believed that the high initial nickel concentration in the salt contributed to the buildup of chromium. However, it has not been possible to propose a mechanism which satisfactorily explains the exponential dependence. Despite the initially high nickel concentration and the relatively large percentage of Uranium tetrafluoride incorporated in the salt systems, the maximum attack of INOR-8 was limited in all specimens to one and one half thousandths of an inch. Thus the test lends encouragement to the use of salt mixtures containing the larger concentrations of uranium required for one-region power-convertor reactors. The indication of mass transfer, however, will require further study. Metallographic examination of Inconel forced-convection loop 9377 dash 5, which circulated the flouride salt for 15038 hours at a maximum temperature of 1300 degrees Farenheit, revealed heavy intergranular and general subsurface voids ranging in depth from 12 to 22 thousandths of an inch in the first heater leg and from 18 to 24 thousandths of an inch in the second heater leg. Examination of Inconel loop 9377 dash 6, which circulated non-uranium-bearing breeder salf with 13 mole percent thorium tetraflouride for 13155 hours at a maximum temperature of 1300 degrees Farenheit, revealed moderate general and intergranular voids ranging from 1 to 8 thousandths of an inch deep in the first heater leg and from 3 to 13 thousandths of an inch in the second leg. The unheated bend connecting the two heater legs and the cold-leg sections of each loop showed some pitting to a depth of 1 thousandth of an inch and a relatively light concentration of subsurface voids up to 3 thousandths of an inch deep. Of particular interest is the difference in depths of corrosion in the two loops. The depth of void formation in loop 9377-6, which circulated a nonuranium-bearing breeder salt with 13 mole percent thorium tetrafluoride, was approximately half that in loop 9377-5, which circulated a salt containing a small percentage of uranium tetrafluoride and Thorium tetraflouride. Since the temperature and operating conditions for both loops were approximately the same, the results support the prediction that salts containing thorium, even in relatively large amounts, should cause less corrosion than salts which carry uranium. This prediction is based on the finding that long-term corrosion in fuel-bearing fluoride mixtures results from the reaction which is reducible only to thorium metal. Graphite in the molten salt reactor experiment core is to be banded to prevent lateral distortion during reactor operation. A suitable banding material must meet the following requirements. It must withstand corrosion by the fluoride fuel. It must retain its strength at reactor operating temperatures. It must have approximately the same coefficient of expansion as the graphite. It must not be carburized as a result of intimate contact with the graphite. It must be compatible with INOR-8. Molybdenum appears to be highly suited to this application on the basis of the first three requirements. To evaluate its properties with respect to the last two requirements, two thermal-convection loops contains a molybdenum insert in the hottest section in contact with graphite and INOR-8. Details concerning the design and operation of these tests are discussed in section 2 point 11 of this report. During routine qualification of welders on INOR-8 material, a possible weld cracking problem was detected in one heat of the alloy. Both bend tests and metallographic examination revealed the incidence of cracking, and a cursory examination of the welding procedures indicated no obvious remedy. Because of the importance of this problem, an investigation was immediately started to determine its seriousness and to develop preventive methods. Parent plate and welding wire of the same types as those used when cracking was observed were studied in the laboratory. Highly restrained welds were prepared and the incidence of cracking was verified, indicating that minor modifications in welding procedure would not materially improve the situation. Further examination of these welds revealed prevalent microporosity and occasional microfissures in the heat-affected zone of the weld. As a result of this preliminary evaluation, a study was concentrated on both the weld metal and the base metal. In an effort to overcome the weld-metal cracking difficulties, an experimental INOR-8 weld-metal composition containing 2 weight percent niobium was investigated. This filler metal was developed in the course of the INOR-8 welding program previously conducted by the Welding and Brazing Laboratory and was considered exceptionally promising in view of its excellent elevated temperature mechanical properties. Welds made on the suspect heat of base plate exhibited no evidence of weld-metal cracking, either in bend tests or in metallographic sections. Wire from two laboratory melts of this alloy was deposited with no evidence of defects in the weld metal, indicating that use of this alloy will prevent weld-metal cracking. In addition to this work, approximately 175 metallographic specimens of various INOR-8 welds made over the past few years were carefully re-examined to determine whether cracks were present which had been overlooked during routine metallography. A rapid means of screening was developed which accurately detected the presence of minute defects without the laborious process of high-magnification examination of each sample. Any cracks that were found in this screening could subsequently be examined with a conventional microscope. As was expected and previously reported, most of the welds made on the high-boron heat of INOR-8 exhibited many cracks. However, welds made with approximately 10 different heats of weld wire which were considered to possess good weldability were resistant to cracking. A high degree of restraint was used in making the welds, and only one of these heats exhibited microfissures in the weld metal. Even in this case, however, the incidence of microfissuring did not appear notably more pronounced than that observed in similar welds of other nickel-base alloys, such as Hastelloy-B, Hastelloy-W, and Inconel, which are usually considered to have excellent weldability. Studies to evaluate the microfissuring tendencies of INOR-8 parent material were focused on the hot-ductility test developed and carried out at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute. To date, it has been demonstrated that the particular heat of parent material exhibiting cracking difficulties in the welder qualification work and subsequent laboratory work possesses poor ductility at high temperatures. It can be seen that samples of Westinghouse heat "M-1566" exhibited a 75 percent reduction in area when pooled at 2300 degrees Farenheit, while the suspect heat of material exhibited essentially 0 percent reduction in area, even though both materials have approximately the same melting points. Furthermore, the suspect heat of material appeared to be permanently damaged after heating to 2400 degrees Farenheit since the ductility remained 0 upon cooling down to at least 2000 degrees Farenheit. Heat "M-1566" material, on the other hand, provided a 48 percent reduction in area after being cooled to and tested at 2000 degrees Farenheit. Although the results to date are inconclusive, it appears that the melting practice affects the hot ductility and weld-cracking tendency to a large extent. The investigations are continuing in an effort to determine the influence of material chemistry and melting practice upon the hot ductilities and cracking or microfissuring susceptibilities of various heats of "INOR-8". Studies continue in an effort to develop suitable techniques for producing solidified-metal seals for Molten Salt Reactor Program applications. The sump-type solidified-metal seal failed to seal on the eleventh attempt after ten successful prior sealings. The base metal of this seal was "INOR-8", and the sealing alloy was 80 weight percent gold and 20 weight percent copper. Opening and closing the seal was accomplished by direct induction heating. The required sealing temperature with this alloy was about 1700 degrees Fahrenheit. Failure was caused by a fracture in the INOR-8 base material, which allowed the sealing alloy to leak out. The failure occurred through an intergranular crack, probably resulting from general intergranular attack of the base metal by the sealing alloy and from the severe thermal stresses set up by direct induction heating. Studies are continuing with molybdenum-fiber compacts impregnated with brazing alloy as the sealing medium. It appears that impregnated metal-fiber compacts of this type can be operated successfully for several sealing operations. However, slight oxidation of the mating components will prevent adequate sealing, and these components must then be cleaned of oxide or replaced. A seal of this type was attempted on two "INOR-8" plates. However, after only one sealing, the alloying of base metal and gold-copper sealing alloy was so great that the seal would not separate cleanly. Because of the requirement to use INOR-8 for Molten Salt Reactor Project applications, two INOR-8 plates have been coated with molybdenum by vapor deposition and are being prepared for use in another fiberseal experiment. Past work was done to determine whether INOR-8 is embrittled by precipitation of intermetallic compounds. No embrittling precipitates were found in material which contained alloying constituents in concentrations from about the minimum to the median of the range specified for INOR-8. In studies of nickel-base alloys containing 10, 15, and 20 weight percent molybdenum and 10 weight percent chromium, and 10 weight percent iron, there was evidence that intermetallic compounds formed within the investigated temperature range of 1500 to 2000 degrees Farenheit in the 20 percent molybdenum alloys when they contained 10 percent iron. Precipitate was not found in alloys containing 4 percent iron, implying that the solubility of iron is between 4 and 10 percent in nickel-base alloys which contain 15 to 20 percent molybdenum, 5 to 10 percent chromium, and 4 to 8 hundredths of a percent carbon. The specification for INOR-8 permits a maximum of 5 percent iron and when other constituents within the allowable ranges are also present, it remains to be confirmed that no intermetallic compound will occur. Also of interest are the compositional limits of the phase boundary in question to establish what deviations from specifications might be permitted. Microstructures were studied of a series of 18% molybdenum alloys encompassing the maximum compositional limits of INOR-8. Samples of these alloys were heat treated for 100 and 1000 hours at temperatures ranging from 900 to 2000 degrees Fahrenheit. In general, metallographic examination of the specimens showed no intermetallic compounds but did reveal the presence of a fine-grain boundary precipitate occurring in the temperature range of 1100 to 1650 degrees Fahrenheit. This precipitate, thought to be a carbide, went back into solution at 1800 degrees Fahrenheit. Two alloys were observed to have precipitated particles, as yet unidentified, that did not redissolve at 1800 degrees Fahrenheit. Both the iron and chromium content of these alloys was in the range of 8 to 10 percent, indicating that this may be the region of composition where intermetallic compound formation begins. Test specimens of additional alloys were prepared that bracketed the compositions where the alleged intermetallic compounds were found in an attempt to confirm the proposed phase boundary. The alloys were decarburized by a hydrogen firing treatment prior to testing in an effort to eliminate any precipitate caused by residual carbon. Aging tests for 100 and 1000 hour durations have been started on these materials. The allowable design stresses for INOR-8 reported previously have been revised as follows. The minimum specified yield strength was increased from 35,000 to 40,000 pounds per square inch. Additional creep data enabled minimum creep rates to be established. The criterion for establishing high-temperature stresses was changed. Several factors led to these decisions. For instance, previous values were based on a Larsen-Miller plot of the stress to produce 1 percent creep strain. This criterion was replaced by four-fifths of the stress to produce rupture in 10 million hours, or two-thirds of the stress to produce a minimum creep rate of 10 to 15 percent per hour. The fractions four-fifths and two-thirds were used to avoid possible problems associated with the effect of irradiation on rupture life or creep rate. The maximum allowable stress is based on the criterion which produces the lowest stress at each temperature. Tensile tests on cast INOR-8 have been performed by the Haynes Stellite Company and by the Mechanical Properties Group at ORNL. These tests were performed on 250 and 505 thousandths of an inch diameter bars of three heats of cast metal. Creep and stress-rupture tests will also be performed on cast metal within the next six months. A program is underway to determine the effect of notches on the stress-rupture properties of INOR-8. Rod specimens of heat SP-19 are being tested at 1100 and 1300 degrees Fahrenheit in air for times up to several thousand hours. Results of the first few tests indicate that specimens with a notch radius of 5 thousandths of an inch are not significantly weaker than smooth specimens. The use of unclad graphite in a molten-salt reactor requires that not more than a small percentage of the graphite pore space be filled with salt. To ensure this condition, a test program has been in progress to study the impregnation of various potential grades of graphite by the 67 mole percent lithium flouride, 18 and one half percent Beryllium flouride, 14 percent throrium tetraflouride, and ond half mole percent uranium tetraflouride salt used in this experiment. This was done at 1300 degrees Farenheit for various times and pressures. Corrected text: The use of unclad graphite in a molten-salt reactor requires that not more than a small percentage of the graphite pore space be filled with salt. To ensure this condition, a test program has been in progress to study the impregnation of various potential grades of graphite by the 67 mole percent lithium flouride, 18 and one half percent Beryllium flouride, 14 percent throrium tetraflouride, and ond half mole percent uranium tetraflouride salt used in this experiment. This was done at 1300 degrees Farenheit for various times and pressures. A radiographic technique has been used to determine the location and configuration of the salt impregnated into specimens of nine grades of low-permeability graphite. All had less than 1 percent of their bulk volumes impregnated by the salt in the standard permeation screening test. Transverse and longitudinal thin-section samples from salt-impregnated specimens of each grade of graphite were taken. These radiographs are indicative of what has occurred in each graphite specimen, but examination of more specimens would be necessary to determine whether these salt distributions are typical. The skin-like permeability of some grades of graphite suggests that machining tends to open up some of the closed pores of the graphite. In general, the pipe specimens were impregnated through the cut ends rather than transversely through the walls. Presumably, little or no salt would impregnate the pipe if the ends were suitably sealed by some method such as brazing. Tests are planned to determine whether this is true. The B-1 graphite, which had the smallest amount of impregnating salt, had a deep longitudinal crack in its radiograph prior to the impregnation test. The small crack above it was not detected until after the radiograph was taken so it is not possible to determine whether salt impregnation caused it. However, the overall appearance of the radiograph suggests that the small crack was in the as-received graphite. The longitudinal thin section for the B-11 graphite was broken during its preparation, apparently due to the deep longitudinal crack. These radiographic examinations seem to show that graphite can be obtained which will not take up molten salt except for less than 50 thousandths of an inch surface impregnations under the conditions of the tests. The 150 pounds per square inch gauge salt pressure used in the tests is approximately three times the maximum expected in the Molten Salt Reactor Experiment. Specimens from the wall of a large graphite pipe with an outer diameter of 3 and 11 16ths inches and an inner diameter of 2 and  5 8ths inches were submerged for 100 hours in a 67 mole percent lithium fluoride salt at 1300 degrees Farenheit and 150 pounds per square inch gauge pressure. This graphite had 5 and one half percent of its bulk volume permeated by the salt, which is approximately five times the maximum found for the standard size of 1 and 1 quarter inch outer diameter and 7 eigths inch inner diameter for CEY graphite. Additional samples of the large pipe are being sought for testing to determine whether the increase in porosity resulted simply from the larger fabrication size. Additional standard salt permeation tests were made on 1 and 1/4-inch outer diameter and 7/8-inch inner diameter CEY-grade pipe. The specimens were taken from the same lot of graphite as those for previous tests but from a different pipe. The bulk volume of the graphite permeated by 67 mole percent lithium fluoride salt was 0.3% compared with 1% on the specimens in the earlier tests. The CEY specimens in the earlier tests had some microscopically visible cracks; those in the current tests did not, which probably explains the permeation difference. The brazing of graphite-to-graphite and graphite-to-metal joints in air would be expected to increase the pore sizes of the graphite because of its low oxidation resistance. Since the brazing cycle is very short, however, it was thought that only a slight effect might be produced, despite the relatively high temperatures used. To determine the degree of change, the Welding and Brazing Laboratory supplied control and oxidized specimens of CEY graphite for the standard salt permeation test. The oxidized specimens had been exposed to air for 20 seconds at about 2372 degrees Fahrenheit. The percentages of the bulk volume of the graphite permeated by salt were 3 and 5 tenths, respectively, for the control and "oxidized" specimens. Therefore, it appears that brazing graphite in air results in some increase in its porosity. In preheating a molten-salt reactor prior to filling it with salt, temperatures will be lower (932°F compared to 1292°F), but time will be long. The above results indicate that, in the preheating process, care should be taken to exclude or minimize oxygen or oxidation catalysts, particularly at temperatures exceeding 752°F. Otherwise, the graphite pores may be enlarged and the potential for salt permeation increased. The studies by Cook which revealed the problem of uranium dioxide precipitation from fused salts were conducted initially on fuels which contained neither zirconium nor thorium fluoride. It was suggested that zirconium and thorium would act as inhibitors to the uranium dioxide formation, and tests were conducted on several salts containing these metals. It was readily shown that 5 mole percent zirconium tetrafluoride eliminated any precipitation of uranium. In the past six months tests with 65 mole percent lithium flouride, 30 and 1 half percent beryllium fluoride, 4 percent thorium tetrafluoride, and 1 half mole percent uranium tetraflouride salts were conducted both in contact with graphite and in a container with no graphite present. Radiographic examination revealed precipitation within 20 hours, and the tests were concluded after 100 hours. As expected, the greatest amount of precipitation occurred when graphite was present. The precipitates were analyzed by x-ray diffraction and identified as uranium dioxide. Thus it may be concluded that 4 mole percent thorium tetrafluoride will not inhibit uranium precipitation. However, several tests were conducted for more than 3000 hours with salts containing 14 mole percent thorium tetra fluoride and no precipitation of any type was detected. Thus thorium is an effective inhibitor of uranium dioxide formation when present in the salt at some concentrations greater than 4 mole percent. Standard tests were made with the molten salt reactor experiment fuel mixture, 70 mole percent lithium fluoride, 23 percent beryllium fluoride, 5 percent zirconium tetrafluoride, 1 mole percent thorium tetrafluoride, and 1 mole percent uranium tetrafluoride. The salt mixture was exposed for 500 hours to National Carbon Company graphite, reactor grade graphite at 1300 degrees Farenheit. A similar charge of salt was used as a control in a capsule containing no graphite. The tests were monitored by radiography at 100 and 500 hours. Precipitates were noted in both capsules at the end of 100 hours, with approximately five times as much being present in the test capsule containing graphite. No additional precipitation was noted after 500 hours. X-ray analyses indicate that the precipitates are entirely monoclinic zirconium dioxide. No evidence of beryllium oxide, thorium dioxide, or uranium dioxide was found. It appears that the usual oxygen contamination was present in the graphite and that zirconium dioxide was formed in preference to other possible oxides. The slight amount of precipitate in the control capsule probably resulted from chemisorbed oxygen on the inner surface of the metal container. It thus appears that zirconium is behaving as expected in preventing the formation of uranium dioxide. Work has continued on the evaluation of various molten fluoride salts as purging agents to remove the normal oxygen contamination from graphite. As reported previously and discussed above, uranium or zirconium, depending on the composition of the salts, will precipitate as oxides from the molten salts in the presence of oxygen. A large source of oxygen in the molten salt reactor experiment is the graphite moderator. One technique suggested to remove most of the oxygen from the graphite is to purge the system with a fused salt. The usual method is to purge a standard crucible of National Carbon Company graphite, reactor grade graphite with the purging salt of interest at 1300 degrees Farenheit in a vacuum for various times. To evaluate the effectiveness of this treatment, the purging salt is replaced with 62 mole percent lithium fluoride, 37 mole percent beryllium fluoride, and 1 mole percent uranium tetrafluoride and the test conditions are repeated with exposure time as a variable. If oxygen is present, a uranium dioxide precipitate readily forms which can be detected by radiography. Neither 62 mole percent lithium fluoride, 37 mole percent beryllium fluoride, and 1 mole percent uranium tetrafluoride salt nor 67 mole percent lithium fluoride, 18 and 1/2 percent beryllium fluoride, 14 percent thorium tetrafluoride, and 1 half percent uranium tetrafluoride salt have proved effective as purging salts for 20 and 100 hour purging periods. To date, 50 mole percent sodim fluoride, 46 mole percent zirconium tetrafluoride, and 4 mole percent uranium tetrafluoride salt has been the most effective purging salt tried. These precursory tests indicate that the effectiveness of purging with this salt may be time dependent and may be associated with the rate of oxygen diffusion through the graphite. Purging tests of graphite with this sodium fluoride salt are in progress and will continue for 500 hours to further evaluate this possibility. As a result of the tests that have been conducted, it appears that some benefit can be derived from purging of graphite with molten salts. Moreover, it should be emphasized that the metal surfaces as well as the graphite must be purged after construction of the reactor is completed, and a barren-salt purge would serve to check the operation of the system as well as to clean the metal surfaces and purge the graphite. It has been reported that in less than 20 hours the thermal-decomposition products of ammonium bifluoride crystals in the presence of graphite apparently removed the normal oxygen contamination in the graphite to such an extent that no uranium dioxide precipitation occurs when 62 mole percent lithium fluoride, 37 mole percent beryllium fluoride, and 1 mole percent uranium tetrafluoride contacts the graphite at 1300 degrees Farenheit. An National Carbon Company graphite, reactor grade graphite crucible that received the ammonium bifluoride treatment was monitored radiographically at periodic intervals during exposure to lithium fluoride, beryllium fluoride, uranium tetrafluoride salt at 1300 degrees Fahrenheit. After 2000 hours of exposure, there was no precipitate detectable in the lithium fluoride salt. The test was prematurely terminated after 3000 hours because a small leak developed in the Inconel protective container. The leak permitted oxygen to enter the crucible and a precipitate was formed.