In order to facilitate graphite sampling and to make possible the use of solid control rods, the reactor layout was reviewed, and the pump location was moved from the top of the reactor to a position to the left of the top of the reactor which was accessible from above. This change, while not of a basic nature, necessitated a considerable amount of new design work. A tee section on top of the reactor vessel was designed as an entry point for control rods and graphite samples, and as an outlet for fuel. A frozen salt seal and a gasketed flange type of gas seal were designed for the entry port. Also, thimbles and rods together with rod drives and a cooling system had to be designed for the control system. Moving the pump required designing a pump support structure that would allow for movement of the pump as the suction and discharge lines changed length due to thermal cycling of the system. A stress analysis of the entire piping system had to be re-done. Auxiliary systems for the pump, off-gas handling system, electrical heating system layout, and all penetration designs were modified somewhat as a result of the cell piping changes. Containment cell penetrations were designed and checked. The top plug design was modified to increase the minimum design pressure for the containment to 40 psi. The drain-tank cooling system was simplified and improved with respect to mechanical complexity and steam flows.  Major building modification design was completed and sent to prospective bidders. Component designs were completed, and a design report for these components was issued. A design package consisting of the reactor vessel, storage tanks, radiator, and heat exchanger was sent to prospective bidders.  Thirteen instrument-application drawings were issued for comment. Preparation of these drawings is approximately 85% complete. Preparation of instrument application tabulations is approximately 60% complete. Twelve thermocouplelocations drawings were issued for approval. Control circuit design is in a preliminary stage. Layout of the instrumentation and controls system is proceeding as layout of the building and equipment become firm and as instrumentation requirements become known. A front-elevation layout of the main control board and a proposal for layout of the main control area have been prepared.  A study of molten salt reactor experiment data handling requirements is nearing completion.  A study is underway to determine the most reliable and least expensive method of providing single-point temperature alarm channels for monitoring the operating status of freeze flanges and valves.  There are no areas of design that pose unresolved problems, and the design of the Molten Salt Reactor Experiment is essentially on schedule.  Design of a 5 inch freeze flange incorporating a buffered ring-joint gas seal was completed and procurement initiated for INOR-8 forgings and soft nickel rings. A 6 inch freeze flange of Inconel was fabricated and installed in the thermalcycle and gas-seal test facility. A study of fabrication and inspection methods for the flanges and rings was initiated. Thermal cycle and seal tests for a 3-1/2 inch Inconel flange and gold-plated Inconel gasket using a spring clamp indicated that successful seals can be made by this method.  Freeze valves opened by Calrod heaters and incorporating siphon breaks were installed in the engineering test loop and successfully tested under extreme operating conditions.  A two-piece pipe heater insulation unit was tested and discarded due to excessive heat loss. A modified heater, better adapted for maintenance from above and designed for less heat loss, was accepted for testing.  Tests conducted on the core-heater prototype verified the calculated heat loss, but insulation shrinkage caused some trouble. The system was operated for 3000 hours without difficulty and with no apparent deterioration of the metal components.  A firm proposal for the sampler enricher was accepted for testing and detailed design work began. The solder freeze valve was less reliable than had been predicted and was replaced in the sampler design with a buffered-seat gate valve. The sample capsule development progressed to the stage of a hot-cell crushing and unloading study. A sample transport container was designed and constructed for testing a system of atmospheric control during shipment of the deoxidized capsule to the site and return of the sample to the hot cell.  The drain-tank cooler was mocked up and testing began.  Flow tests in the lower head of the one-fifth-scale core model indicate a shift in flow characteristics with reduced flow. Fuel age and heat transfer coefficient and characteristics of solid distribution were measured in this area. Efforts to produce oscillatory disturbances in the core were unsuccessful.  Components for the full-scale-core-model test loop have been fabricated and installed in preparation for the arrival of the core internals.  Helium purification tests, using titanium sponge as the oxygen getter, were used as the basis for the design of a full-scale molten salt reactor experiment helium purification system.  The engineering test loop was operated continuously for 1300 hours, during which the oxide buildup history was observed during a startup-flushing operation. Revisions made to the bubble-type level indicator made the system very reliable under engineering test loop conditions. The design of the graphite section of the salt loop together with the graphite-handling dry box was completed and fabrication started.  A maintenance plan using the most appropriate maintenance method for each operation was evolved. The one-twelfth-scale model was completed to the existing design stage. A full-scale maintenance mockup is being constructed for study of special problems such as freeze-flange operation.  The program to develop a remotely brazed joint for 1-1/2 inch pipe progressed to the bench-demonstration stage, and design for tools to produce remotely brazed joints was started. Several mechanical disconnects were demonstrated which could be used in auxiliary lines.  A program was initiated for the study of steam generator problems.  Development of a continuous-level element, for use in measurement of molten salt level in the Molten Salt Reactor Experiment fuel and coolant salt pump bowl, is continuing. A graphite float assembly was fabricated, and a test stand was constructed. A recent transformer design for the level element was operated for more than two weeks at temperatures in excess of 1200°F without evidence of insulation failure. Performance data obtained from this transformer at temperature is very encouraging.  A new design concept for a single-point conductivity-type level probe was developed and tested. A conceptual design was developed for a two-point level probe, based on the new design concept and compatible with the physical geometry of the molten salt reactor experiment storage tanks.  Extensive measurements were made of the resistivity of a molten salt at various voltages, frequencies, and temperatures.  A temperature-scanning system is being developed to provide a real-time profile display of approximately 250 thermocouples attached to the reactor pipes and components.  The development of techniques and procedures for attaching sheathed thermocouples to INOR-8 pipes and vessels is ongoing. Samples of sheathed thermocouple wire have been purchased, and various methods of attachment are being investigated.  The molten salt reactor experiment temperature coefficients of reactivity were calculated and found to be -2.8 x 10^-5 change in effective multiplication factor per degree Fahrenheit for the fuel salt, and -6.0 x 10^-5 change in effective multiplication factor per degree Fahrenheit for the graphite. The reactivity worth of all three molten salt reactor experiment control rods was calculated to be 6.7% change in effective multiplication factor. The worth of individual rods varied between 2.8 and 2.9% change in effective multiplication factor, while the reactivity worth of pairs of rods varied between 4.9 and 5.3% change in effective multiplication factor.  The addition of rod thimbles without control rods lowered the peak-to-average power density ratio by about 8% of the homogeneous reactor value and moved the position of peak power density to a point about 6 inches away from the reactor center line.  The peak gamma-ray heating rate in the core was calculated to be 2.5 Watts per square centimeter with the reactor at 10 Megawatts; the maximum fast-neutron heating in the rod thimbles (rods out) was about 0.1 Watts per square centimeter.  The critical fuel concentration with the use of 40 thousandths of an inch thick INOR-8 fuel tubes in the molten salt reactor experiment was calculated to be nearly double that associated with no cladding present.  An improved estimate of the activity associated with the fluoride-19 neutron alpha reaction was obtained. The activity associated with the pump bowl was calculated on the basis that the daughter products of xenon and krypton plate out in the bowl. The associated dose rate 10 feet from the pump bowl was 1000 r/hour after 10 days cooling time following 1 years operation at 10 MW. For the same conditions, the residual activity in the heat exchanger gave a dose rate of 20,000 r/hr, based on the assumption that all the isotopes which might plate out on INOR-8 do so in the heat exchanger.  The gamma-ray dose rates above the top shield during 10-Mw operation were calculated to be about 15 mr/hour for a solid shield and about 80 mr/hour if the ordinary concrete has 1/2-inch thick slits; the neutron dose rates for these conditions were about 2 mr/hour and 4.6 r/hr, respectively. Filler material and additional shielding will reduce the dose rates below the tolerance value.  Estimates were made of the dose rates outside the side shield from individual sources within the reactor cell. The primary radiation source during 10-Mw power operation was the neutron-capture gammas from the iron in the thermal shield. With 7 feet of ordinary concrete, the total dose rate was about 45 mr/hour; addition of 1 foot of barytes concrete block reduced the dose rate to about 1 mr/hr.  Examination of the final eight INOR-8 forced-convection loops was completed, and summary information for the program is reported. In general, maximum corrosion rates of INOR-8 by fused salts at 1300 degrees Fahrenheit ranged from 1/2 to 1 thousandth of an inch in 20,000 hours for both LiF-BeFs and NaF-BeFs systems. The attack was in the form of a pitted surface layer.  The compatibility of molybdenum sheet with the materials in the Molten Salt Reactor Experiment (MSRE) system has been tested in thermal convection loops. No significant attack was observed on the metal parts of the system, however, a deterioration of the mechanical properties of the molybdenum was noted.  Corrosion studies were initiated to investigate the effects of oxidizing impurities in fused salt mixtures. Tests designed to determine the impact of moisture were completed and are currently being analyzed.  Work was continued to determine the solubility limits of chromium and iron in nickel-base alloys containing 18% molybdenum over the temperature range of 900 to 2000°F. A phase boundary for this metal system has been established.  The temperature range of melting was investigated for various heats of INOR-8, and data are presented that show solidus temperatures to be higher than nil ductility temperatures reported by Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute.  Specific heat of annealed INOR-8 was determined by direct calorimetric measurements and the data reported. An anomalous rise of about 20% was observed at approximately 600°C.  The total hemispherical emittance was determined for INOR-8 in the bright-finished, matte, and oxidized conditions. INOR-8 in the oxidized condition was found to have a total hemispherical emittance at 600°C of 0.76, compared with 0.24 for an unoxidized surface value.  Studies were conducted to circumvent the problem of cracking and microfissuring observed in the welds of certain heats of INOR-8 material. The problem is associated with improper melting practices used by vendors in pouring the initial ingots. By using base metal and weld metal originally poured under staisfactory conditions, sound, crack-free welds possessing good mechanical properties can be made.  An investigation is underway to develop brazing procedures suitable for remote fabrication operations. Brazed joints possessing good shear strengths at elevated temperatures were made, and a joint design suitable for remote operation was developed.  A program has been started to determine the strain fatigue behavior of INOR-8. Data at 1300 and 1500°F are reported with a plot of Coffin's equation.  Molten-salt permeation tests with different grades of graphite indicated that increasing the diameter of a graphite rod or fabricating it in the shape of a pipe can decrease its resistance to impregnation by molten salts.  Tests showed that oxygen contamination can be removed from a moderately permeable grade of graphite by exposing it for 20 hours to the thermal decomposition products of NH4F-HF at temperatures as low as 930°F. The tensile specimens of 4 hundredths of an inch thick INOR-8 exposed to this same oxygen-purging atmosphere developed a reaction layer less than 0.0005 inch thick. The reaction layer did not alter the properties of the INOR-8.  A molten-salt-fuel capsule experiment has been operating at the Materials Testing Reactor from May 5 to July 24 and is now at Battelle Memorial Institute for postirradiation examination. The four capsules contained fuel in AGOT, fuel impregnated, or R-0025 unimpregnated graphite boats. Samples of molybdenum, pyrolytic carbon, and INOR-8 were irradiated in contact with the fuel to temperatures up to 900°C.  Studies of the crystallization of the molten salt reactor experiment fuel show that with fast cooling a nonequilibrium path is followed along which the equilibrium primary phase is formed. Slow cooling leads to considerable segregation of the molten salt reactor experiment fuel, with uranium tetrafluoride concentrated in the last liquid to freeze. Since the first phases that freeze out are rich in zirconium tetrafluoride, the depleted residual liquid can, under some conditions, deposit uranium dioxide. Small segregated regions are produced when frozen plugs of fuel are used as freeze valves.  Much difficulty has been encountered with fuel studies involving sampling and measuring oxide content in the range of 100-1000 parts per million. A suitable resolution for this problem is being sought.  An apparatus for measuring the surface tension of fluoride melts has been constructed for use in studying the wetting behavior of salts with respect to graphite. Graphite withstood at least a mild exposure to cesium vapor without noticeable alteration of its interfacial behavior toward fuel.  A large-scale move from laboratories in the Y-12 Plant to new quarters at Reactor Chemistry Division is being planned. Methods for analyses of the molten salt reactor experiment cover gas are under development, as are improved treatments for fuel and coolant purification.  The enthalpy of the lithium beryllium fluoride coolant mixture was determined over the range 50 to 620°C. For the liquid, the heat capacity varied from 0.48 calories per gram per degree Celsius at 500°C to 0.66 calories per gram per degree Celsius at 800°C. The solid-liquid transition was not sharply defined; the heat of fusion, evaluated between 360 and 480°C, was 151.4 calories per gram.  The enthalpy of the liquid was re-determined using a sample of circulated salt. Despite significant differences in composition, the enthalpies of circulated and uncirculated salt samples were equal within 3.5%. In contrast, the heat capacities showed a deviation of as much as 10% at the extremes of the temperature range; mean values of the heat capacity were identical.  A single experiment to test the possibility of separating rare earths from thorium tetrafluoride in molten salt breeder reactor blanket salt by dissolving the rare earths in hydrogen fluoride containing Antimony pentafluoride was unsuccessful. The solution did not dissolve either rare earths or thorium.  The additional design studies indicated that it was not practical to flange the reactor head but that it was probably worth the additional complexity in pump mounting to remove the pump from the top of the reactor vessel. It was believed that the only advantage provided by flanging the reactor top was in the ability to remove the core independent of the reactor vessel. This was thought not to be of sufficient importance to warrant the additional complexity of a large flanged seal.  Moving the pump off the reactor was considered quite desirable in order to facilitate graphite sampling and control-rod operation. The complexity of a more involved pump mount was thought justified by the accessibility it provided to graphite and rods. Accordingly, the design was changed to include the new fuel-pump location.  The liquid-poison tubes described in the previous report were eliminated. With the pump moved off the reactor and the top exposed, the more conventional and tested solid control rods were preferred.  In all other basic concepts, the molten salt reactor experiment system remains unchanged, and detailed building alteration and component design has proceeded. The result is that building-alteration design and component specification have been issued to prospective bidders.  The electrical heater design is not yet finished, but work is proceeding without difficulty. Instrumentation is also incomplete but is being carried forward as rapidly as necessary to meet construction and installation schedules. Design of both these phases can be accomplished during the building-alteration period and the component-fabrication period.  There will be a decline in design manpower effort as of October 1, 1961, and for the remainder of the fiscal year the design manpower will be carried at a reduced rate. This effort will consist essentially of effecting necessary minor changes and completing auxiliary-systems designs.  The general configuration of the core and container vessel has not been changed, but some changes have resulted from moving the pump off the top of the reactor. These changes involve the reactor discharge line, the upper-head neutron shield, the graphite-sampling access, and the control rod penetrations.  The reactor discharge is through a 10 inch pipe, rising vertically from the center of the top head. This 10 inch pipe has a 5 inch side outlet leading off to the pump suction. The 10 inch diameter vertical section terminates in a flanged top with a metallic O-ring gasket. Into the 10 inch pipe, and extending down to a point above the 5 inch discharge tee, is a hollow plug which is welded to the mating flange. The purpose of this plug is to provide removable penetrations for control rod thimbles and a graphite-sample port. There is an annulus between the plug and the vertical pipe and fuel entering this annulus can be frozen to form a salt seal. In this manner, the ring-seal flange is never required to hold molten salt but becomes a gas seal only. Air is circulated on both sides of the annular space. When the air is unheated it serves as a coolant to establish this freeze plug. The air passes through an electrical furnace so that it can be heated, when desired, to thaw the plug after the reactor has been drained so that the plug can be removed.  Removing the pump from the top of the reactor vessel made it unnecessary to put the massive INOR-8 shield plug in the top plenum of the reactor vessel. This plug has been eliminated completely, and the resulting space will be filled with fuel.  Provision has now been made for control rods and graphite samples in the center of the reactor core. The four graphite stringer positions at the corners of the exact center of the core are omitted from the core matrix. INOR-8 thimbles are inserted in three of these positions. The upper ends of the thimbles are welded in the bottom of the plug which fills the 10 inch diameter vertical pipe on top of the reactor. These thimbles then provide penetrations into the core into which solid control rods can be inserted for control of the reactor.  The fourth position in the core is designed to accommodate four 7/8-inch diameter graphite rods. Any one of these rods can be withdrawn from the reactor for examination.  In order to remove the sample graphite, a 3-inch diameter access tube extends upward from the base of the flanged plug. A bolted flange seal on top of this tube can be removed for access to the core. This 3-inch riser tube has a plug, similar in principle to the one used on the 10-inch diameter pipe, with a similar frozen-salt annular seal.  The plug in the graphite-sampling port provides a holddown of the four samples. When the flange is unbolted and the plug is removed, the samples are free and can be removed by the graphite-sampling device. In the event that the condition of the sample warrants more extensive examination, main graphite stringers can be removed by opening the 10 inch flange and removing the entire control rod thimble assembly.  The tubes for liquid poison, previously considered for reactor control, were abandoned in favor of rods similar in design to those used successfully in the Aircraft Reactor Experiment.  The door drive mechanism and superstructure, which were not included in the coil-and-enclosure bid package, were redesigned. The single counterweight for the doors was eliminated. Each door was suspended from a drive shaft by means of a wire rope and sheave assembly. A flywheel was mounted on each drive shaft to prevent damage to the door by causing it to fall slowly when released. An over-running clutch was provided for each flywheel to allow the flywheel energy to be dissipated through friction. A magnetic clutch and a magnetic brake were placed on each drive shaft to permit individual raising, lowering, and positioning of the radiator doors. A chain drive system was retained in a modified form.  Several changes were made in the design of the fuel-salt drain tanks. The most significant change was the method of connecting the steam and water lines from the bayonet heat-removal units to the steam dome and water supply.  The number of bayonets was reduced from 40 to 32, and the steam dome diameter was increased to 48 inches. The steam lines enter the steam dome through the lower head, and the bayonet water supply tubes are concentric with the steam lines except at their inlets inside the steam dome. The water supply tube inlets are through the wall of the steam outlet nozzles. The steam dome serves as an intermediate water reservoir during operation. The water inlets are staggered on two elevations to permit use of only half the bayonets, if desirable, by controlling the condensate return rate. The condensate returns to the steam dome from a reservoir located with the condenser outside the drain-tank cell.  The bayonets rest on a support plate that is attached to the steam dome. This allows for removal of the steam dome and bayonets without removing the tank.  The steam dome has a penetration through its center, through which passes a nozzle from the salt tank. This nozzle provides access for inspection and sampling and for inserting level probes in the salt tank.  One major change in layout design has been made. The fuel pump has been moved off the top of the reactor, and therefore, the pump mount must provide flexibility in order to allow for movement imposed by thermal expansion of the lines.  The fuel system now allows for the removal of any component, although, to remove the reactor or pump bowl, some other components may need to be shifted.  The piping system for the revised layout has been analyzed for stresses and has been found to be conservatively loaded by a good margin. The coolant piping system has also been analyzed by the same computer code and was found to be satisfactory.  A satisfactory layout has been accomplished for the secondary piping for the fuel pump. The final design makes use of a ring-joint flange for each line. These flanges are grouped around the pump in a circular pattern to facilitate remote make and break of these containers.  A satisfactory layout of service disconnects plus spares has been completed for the electrical heaters and the thermocouples.  Details of containment penetrations for all services have been designed. The reinforcement of the vessel wall for these penetrations has been designed and analyzed for stresses. The nuclear instrumentation penetrations have been reduced to one large tube in which will be housed all the radiation counters to be used on the equipment. The cooling air which is used to establish and maintain the freeze valves and which also cools the control rods and top surface of the fuel pump is supplied from positive-displacement air pumps located in the special equipment cell. This air is recirculated, and the heat is removed by the space coolers within the reactor containment vessel. All structural members for component mounting within the containment vessel have been designed. This includes the reactor thermal shield, which serves as the structural support for the reactor. The original design of the cover-gas system provided alternatives of recycling or discarding contaminated helium at the option of the operator. Since equipment for cleaning and recycling the gas requires some additional development as well as additional expense, installation of a recycle system has been deferred. The conceptual design of the components of the supply-and-discard system was completed, and the construction drawings were started for the charcoal beds, the cell blowers, and the helium dryers. A drawing showing the general location of components and the arrangement of interconnecting piping was issued for review and comment. Design memoranda on the charcoal beds and the leak detector system were issued. The only basic change made in the off-gas system was in the xenon holdup time provided by the charcoal beds. The design now calls for a xenon holdup time of 90 days at a sweep-gas flow rate of 4.2 liters per minute. The leak-detector system will be used to monitor flanged joints in the fuel circulating system and in various auxiliary lines. Helium pressure, higher than system pressure, will be applied against joint-sealing surfaces. Leakage, if any, will be into the salt system, and leaks will be detected by loss of helium pressure. The heater can be removed from the pipe by breaking the electrical disconnect and engaging the lifting eye with a tool. A simple lifting motion will then remove the unit. The unit consists of heating elements made of resistance coils embedded in fused alumina, thermal insulation, and a metal container or housing. The thermal insulation is a light-weight felt of alumina and silica. Reflective foils are placed at intervals through the insulation. The horizontal piece does not contain heating elements. It serves only as thermal insulation and as a support for the top unit. Process-piping supports penetrate it. Heating elements are provided in the radiator enclosure. Flat, ceramic-embedded heating elements are mounted where possible around the radiator coil. These elements have a combined capability of 30 kilowatts and will be used for preheating and during periods of zero-power operation. At all other times they will be energized at a reduced voltage. Tubular heating units are placed parallel to the tubes and are located between the tubes and the radiator-enclosure doors. The tubular elements will have their full-rated voltage applied when the doors are closed or dropped. The surface temperature of these units will reach 1000°F in 1.5 min, and the heaters are installed to prevent freezing of the outer row of tubes in a loss-of-flow incident. The tubular heaters can also be used in preheating and during barren-salt operation. Two distinct systems of maintenance are provided, one of which permits working directly through the shielding roof plugs for replacement of small components or preparation for removal of large components, and the second requires operation of the crane and a manipulator from a remote control room. Although it is theoretically possible to do all maintenance tasks by the fully remote method, the use of semidirect methods will greatly reduce the time required to perform many small jobs. Furthermore, the capital cost of Building 7505 shielding will be greatly reduced since it will not be necessary to provide protection to control room and office areas for long periods of time while all roof plugs are removed from above the reactor cell for remote maintenance. The completely remote maintenance system, to be used for the replacement of those major components which require removal of major portions of the cell shielding, requires that personnel, operating in a shielded area, can see and manipulate the cell shielding, the component disconnects, and the components. The elements of this system have been designed or specified. The maintenance control room, above and to the right of the reactor cell, provides a shielded work area with windows for direct vision of the reactor cell, drain cell, and crane bay. Located in it are controls for the 7.5-ton and 30-ton cranes, the manipulator, air-operated tools, and the television system. The 7.5 and 30-ton cranes will be modified to permit control of five speeds and three speeds, respectively, in all directions from the maintenance control room. The 30-ton crane will be further modified by the addition of a motorized, 360°-rotating hook and a remote-reading load cell. The manipulator and bridge have been specified, and the rails have been designed to permit the manipulator to be used over the reactor cell and the maintenance practice cell. The television viewing system provides two pairs of stereo cameras, each pair with its own pan-and-tilt mechanism and vehicle to carry it around the Specifications have been written for automatic lift tongs that will engage, lift, lower, and disengage the lower shield beams and shield support beams, using only the remotely operated crane. This semidirect maintenance system permits personnel to use manually operated tools through the cell shielding and to view directly through small windows or with optical aids. Conceptual design of and procurement for the portable maintenance shield has been completed. The shield covers the opening left by the removal of two lower shield beams from the reactor or drain cell and provides a movable opening through which tools, windows, and lights can be inserted. Several hand tools have been designed for use with the shield. Several special problem areas have had to be considered separately. A fixture has been designed for the removal and precise replacement of the relatively heavy sampler-enricher spool piece with expansion bellows. The mechanical tools for making a remotely brazed joint have been designed and detailed for construction. These include machines for holding the pipe, cutting it, tapering machining the male stub, assembling the joint, and holding it during the brazing process. The design of the jigs and fixtures for the assembly of the reactor, fuel circulating pump, heat exchanger, and associated piping is progressing. Conceptual work is almost complete, and detail design has been started. A small model has been built. The jig will consist of four basic parts plus additional supports and bracing. After the completion of the fabrication of the initial system, the jig can be broken down into four parts for storage. If it becomes necessary to fabricate replacement components, only two parts of the jig will be required for the duplication of any given component. The preliminary design of a proposed method for removing small 7/8 inch diameter graphite core samples has been completed. The graphite sampler consists of an eccentric steel plug 32 inches in diameter and 18 inches thick, fitted with seals and buffer gas to prevent the escape of activity or the introduction of air to the reactor system while samples are being removed and replaced. The graphite sampler also includes a standpipe bolted to the sample access flange and to the lower shield plug for containment purposes. An exhaust line will be attached to the lower end of the standpipe, and nitrogen will be introduced at the upper end. Inside the standpipe will be located two containers for the graphite samples, one containing the new graphite sample to be installed and one for the graphite sample that is to be removed. In addition, a bracket for holding the sample-access flange and holddown assembly while samples are being changed will be mounted on the side of the standpipe. Viewing will be through a lead glass plug, and general lighting will be provided by a floodlight inserted in the eccentric steel plug. A zirconia light will be used to project a light beam inside the sample-access pipe for handling the graphite samples. After a preliminary assessment of molten salt reactor experiment hazards it was concluded that neither the amount nor the rate of addition of excess reactivity from any source would create a hazard. Therefore, the need for a fast-acting, multichannel safety system is eliminated. Three control rods are provided. Each control rod has a maximum worth of 0.025 change in multiplication factor over the previous multiplication factor when inserted with all other rods withdrawn. Their combined worth is 0.046 change in multiplication factor over the previous multiplication factor. The maximum rate of withdrawal for a single rod is 0.0002 change in multiplication factor over the previous multiplication factor per second. With three rods inserting as a group, the maximum rate of poisoning is 0.0005 change in multiplication factor over the previous multiplication factor per second. All rods are identical, and any one, but only one at a time, may be used as a servo-operated shim for automatic control purposes. Control rod design has been altered by substituting solid, mechanically driven rods for the liquid poison tubes originally considered. Each poison rod consists of a series of short tubes of B,C which are sheathed with INOR-8 and mounted concentrically on a flexible drive cable. The resulting configuration is the same as a solid rod 1 inch in diameter. These rods move inside of vertical thimbles located centrally in the core. The assembly of three rods is part of a larger flanged-mounted assembly mounted on top of the reactor vessel. The rods are air cooled, but loss of air cooling will not render the rods inoperative. Since ultimate reactor safety will not be vested in the control rods, the number of nuclear penetrations has been reduced from three to one. This remaining penetration, a large water-filled tube, will house two fission chambers and two neutron-sensitive ion chambers. These are sufficient to cover the full range of reactor operation and will serve as control system input sensors. A preliminary list of those situations calling for either automatic shutdown by draining or for control rod insertion has been prepared. All major design work on the building has been completed, and drawings and specifications were sent out to prospective bidders in July. The packages designated A and B will be bid on September 6, 1961. These packages, now combined and currently referred to as Major Building Modification, have had three addenda issued. The addenda were made in time to be included in the September 6 bid date. The remaining site modification design, consisting of Minor Building Modification and Exterior Site, will be completed in October. The demolition and minor alteration work performed on a cost-plus-fixed fee contract by the H. K. Ferguson Company was completed on schedule in June. The work consisted of stripping structural steel from the 24 foot diameter containment vessel, partial excavation of the drain-tank cell, rehabilitation of the storage cells, stripping of obsolete conduit and piping which interfered with molten salt reactor experiment installation, excavation for the nuclear instrumentation tube, removal of a section of the penthouse wall, construction of an outside stairway for an emergency exit, painting of offices, control room and hallways, and general cleanup. Drawings and specifications for the first bid package of work, Modification of Building 7503, have been sent to prospective bidders, and bids for performing this work are to be opened September 6. This package includes all work associated with the modification of the 24 foot diameter reactor containment vessel, the radiator cell, drain-tank cells, the secondary containment walls, and the remote maintenance control room. Involved are structural, piping, and electrical work, all of which will be accomplished by lump-sum contract. Other site-preparation work will be advertised for lump-sum contracts in October, when design work is scheduled to be completed. All site-modification work is scheduled for completion by June 30, 1962. Contracts were awarded on a formal bid basis for the fabrication of INOR-3 plate, sheet, rod, and weld wire for the molten salt reactor experiment. The promised delivery date for this material is September 15th. Bids received for the fabrication of pipe, tubing, and fittings of INOR-8 are being reviewed and evaluated. It is expected that contracts will be awarded to successful bidders in August. Graphite manufacturers have been invited to submit bids for furnishing the molten salt reactor experiment moderator graphite, completely machined to specifications and tolerances. Bid closing date is August 14, and the purchase contract is expected to be awarded to the successful bidder by September. A request for bids on a package of molten salt reactor experiment major components has been sent to prospective fabricators. This package consists of the reactor vessel, including the internal support structure, the radiator, the primary heat exchanger, and the fill-and-drain tanks for both the fuel and coolant systems. All INOR-8 materials will be furnished by the Project. A pre-bid conference with fabricators interested in bidding for this work is scheduled for August 29. Because INOR-8 is a new alloy, it is expected that some fabricators may not be familiar with its working properties. Therefore, sample material produced to Molten Salt Reactor Experiment specifications will be furnished to each qualified prospective fabricator requesting it in order that he may become familiar with the material before bidding. Closing date for bids to fabricate these components is October 6. During the past reporting period, the major effort was directed towards completing an acceptable set of instrument application flow diagrams. A total of 15 drawings were scheduled. Revisions are now being made to all these drawings, bringing them up to date with current thought. It is estimated that this basic part of the instrumentation effort is 85% complete. A tabulation of all instruments shown on the flow diagrams, giving identifying numbers, location, function in the process, and a brief description is also being developed along with the application drawings. This tabulation is approximately 60% complete. Twelve thermocouple-location drawings were issued for Approval, but some additional revisions will be required before final approval is obtained. A tabulation suggesting the method of readout for all thermocouples was also completed. Control circuit design is in a preliminary stage. The first series of Conia tests to establish control-circuit requirements were completed. A functional list of the most important interlocks was prepared. This list is preliminary and many control limits have not yet been established. Layout of the Instrumentation and Controls system is proceeding as layout of the building and equipment become firm and as instrumentation requirements become known. Two major instrument areas have been designated. A main control area will be located at elevation 852 in the northeast corner of the building, and a transmitter room will be located on the 840 level, adjacent to the reactor. Some instrumentation will be located on auxiliary panels outside these areas. However, an effort is being made to centralize instrumentation, and field panels will be used only where necessary or where the nature of the operation dictates that controls and instruments be located in the field. The Instrumentation and Controls system layout is being designed to permit all routine operations to be performed in the main control-room area. All thermocouple leads will be brought through a patch panel located in the auxiliary area adjacent to the main control room. Safety-control-circuit relays will be mounted in a special cabinet also located in the auxiliary control area. Data-logging equipment will be located in a room adjacent to the main control area. All electrical and pneumatic signal lines originating within the contained areas will be brought out through specially designed leaktight penetrations in the wall of the containment vessel. Thermocouple and electrical signal leads will be terminated in pressurized junction boxes located in a tunnel adjacent to the reactor. Standard control cable and thermocouple lead wire will be run in open trays from the tunnel to the main and auxiliary control areas. Pneumatic signal lines will be brought through a tunnel to the transmitter room adjacent to the reactor. Some of these lines will terminate at equipment such as weigh-system control panels, solenoid valves, and pneumatic receivers mounted on auxiliary panels in this area. Other lines will continue through the transmitter room to the main control area. Detail layout of equipment in these areas will begin soon. A survey of requirements for pneumatic tubing, thermocouple cable, and electrical signal cable for the contained areas was made in order to establish the number and size of penetrations needed. A preliminary drawing showing proposed routing of cable, trays, conduits, and tubing throughout the 7503 area was prepared and issued For Comment. Existing facilities will be utilized. This design is based on the principle that only that instrumentation necessary for operation of the reactor system will be located on the main control board (MCB). Other information will be read out either on a data logger or on instruments located in an auxiliary area adjacent to the main control room. Those controls and instruments associated with routine adjustment of reactor power will be located on a console. Although the layout shown is incomplete with respect to details and the number of instruments, comments indicate that it is acceptable from the standpoint of general arrangement, method of presentation, and systems shown. A study of the Molten Salt Reactor Experiment (MSRE) data handling requirements is nearing completion. The objective is to determine those requirements and to propose one or more data systems to meet them. Studies have indicated that approximately 612 input signals, excluding those transmitted to field-mounted instruments and indicator lamps, are to be collected by a data display system. A summary of these inputs is shown below. Of the 517 thermocouple inputs, 245 are used primarily during the reactor heating and cooling operation and will be handled by a separate temperature scanning system. All necessary information for reactor operation will be displayed on the console and main and auxiliary panel boards by conventional recorders and indicators. An automatic data-handling system would implement this system by recording data in a convenient form. Using this approach to information display, a data system should have a capacity of 250 to 300 inputs. The major problem associated with conventional display systems is long-term storage and retrieval of information. This problem arises from storing information on multiple single-point recorders and then having to retrieve and correlate data from various charts at different time bases. Another major disadvantage of the conventional data-display system is the production on charts of large quantities of static data. This static data recording is necessitated by the requirement to record transients should they occur. Using strip charts, the data are continually recorded, even during static system operation. The complete results of the data study will be contained in the report to be issued to the Molten Salt Reactor Experiment Project in the latter part of August or early September. A study is underway to determine the most reliable and least expensive method of monitoring the operating status of freeze flanges and freeze valves. Both the flanges and valves use temperature measurements to indicate their operating status. The flanges are equipped with four thermocouples and four spares, while the valves have three thermocouples and three spares. Low temperature of the flanges indicates normal operation, while low temperature of the valves indicates closed position. High temperature of the freeze flanges indicates possible seal leakage, while high temperature of the valves indicates valve-open position. Definite operating temperature ranges are designated for both the flanges and valves. The operating status of both these components must be known during the fill and drain and normal reactor operation. The freeze-flange status will be determined by monitoring two thermocouples, using single-channel devices. An alarm will be produced when either thermocouple exceeds a preset high limit. Single-channel monitors are required to produce the required reliability. In addition to these monitors, one thermocouple will be logged to provide an operating history. The freeze-valve operation is determined by monitoring three thermocouples with single-channel devices and logging one spare thermocouple for operating history. Two of the single-channel monitors will produce a visual indication when the temperature reaches either high or low setpoints. The visual indication will indicate valve position. A visual signal on low temperature indicates valve closed, and on high temperature, valve open. Control circuits will be utilized with these monitors to produce audible and visual alarm signals should operating malfunctions occur. The third single-channel monitor will be used to provide control interlocks or permissives during certain phases of reactor operation. This unit produces high- or low-limit signals which are used for this purpose. One of the systems being considered for this application utilizes bistable magnetic amplifiers equipped with high/low alarm detectors. The units are completely solid-state devices. A block diagram of the system is shown in Figs. 1.17. The control module provides power to operate up to 22 alarm modules. It contains a circuit common to all alarm modules to provide central indication of high or low alarm condition when any module in the system is triggered. The input signal from a thermocouple is fed to an isolated winding on the alarm-module magnetic amplifier. The magnetic amplifier is adjusted so that an input in its operating range produces a differential output into the limit detecting circuits. If this output exceeds the levels set by the high or low limit set controls, the magnetic amplifier is triggered into a high or low operating condition and drives the proper alarm light or relay. The magnetic amplifier is reset by the reset button, but if the off-normal condition still exists the magnetic amplifier will revert to its alarm condition after reset. The system is designed for fail-safe operation and is equipped with power failure detection circuits. The design of the alarm modules is such that malfunctions can be detected by the alarm circuits. To provide the best reliability, the system would be operated with two control modules, each module supplying one alarm module at each freeze flange and valve. In this manner, the failure of one power supply would not cause the loss of the complete information or control action. The freeze flanges for use in the primary and secondary salt systems are now sized for 5 inch schedule 40 pipe connections. The over-all dimensions, with the exception of the pipe connection size, are the same as those previously reported. The gas seal was changed from a buffered double-conical-gasket type to a buffered ring-joint type because of the following considerations. The conical-gasket type of seal is believed to be susceptible to gasket damage if excessive angular misalignment exists during assembly. It is believed that the ring-joint type of seal is less sensitive to misalignment as the mating flanges are being brought together. Additional confidence in the ability of ring-joint seals to meet the leak tightness requirements has been gained through the freeze-flange thermal cycling testing and described before and the remote-disconnect testing described in another report. Two sets of clamps were purchased for developmental use with the 5 inch flanges, but they were returned to the vendor for heat treatment, which had been overlooked during fabrication. Two sets of rough-machined INOR-8 flange forgings were ordered for development use. Four nickel ring-joint gaskets are also on order. These flanges and gaskets will be used for testing the full-size gas seals and for thermal cycling to check the dimensional stability and thermal-fatigue life of the flanges. A study is under way to determine means of obtaining consistent overall thicknesses of the flange-gasket assemblies. Methods of closely controlling the effective height of the ring gasket and the effective depth of the flange grooves will be required. This requirement is imposed by the steep load-deflection characteristic of the spring clamp. The equipment for testing freeze-flange seals has been completed and put into operation. In heating the 3-1/2 inch flange, it was necessary to install a hollow copper heat collector that easily clears the inside of the pipe but closely fits the bore of the flange. This collector receives heat from the entire length of the silicon carbide heater and conducts a large part of the heat to the flange. By appropriate adjustment of the heater power and suitable insulation thickness on the pipe stubs, the desired temperature distribution was obtained. The 3-1/2 inch flange was assembled, using a gold-plated Inconel gasket and a resilient clamp, and each of the two bolts was torqued to 300 foot pounds. The gasket was lubricated with a coating of graphite-alcohol suspension before installation. During and after torqueing, each clamp block was rapped sharply on each side several times with a small hammer, with noticeable immediate reduction in leak rate. The flange was then cycled 21 times between 200 and 1300°F. No measurable leakage occurred after the fifth cycle. The 3-1/2 inch flange was then disassembled, the gasket was again coated with the graphite alcohol suspension, and the assembly was remade with hammering. As shown in Table 2.1, all seals were nearly perfect during the hot part of thermal cycling, but one of the seals persisted in leaking when cold and showed no improvement after five thermal cycles. A solid-nickel ring gasket has been installed and will undergo similar testing. Additional nickel rings, two of which are grooved on each nose to increase resiliency, are on hand for testing. It is expected that the nickel rings will form tight seals without requiring the use of gold plate. The 6-inch flanged pair in the seal test facility is essentially the molten salt reactor experiment flange design except that the bore is slightly greater and Inconel is used as the flange material instead of INOR-8. Efforts to heat the bore of this flange to 1400°F with the silicon carbide bar heater at the center line and with an additional Nichrome wire heater at the bore were unsuccessful. Resistance heaters were installed on the outside of the pipe stubs adjacent to the flange, and an induction coil was placed in the bore of the flange to supply the required heat distribution. Temperature distributions along the gap between the flanges and on the outside surface will be determined. It is intended, then, to thermal cycle the flanges and check their dimensional stability. Two Calrod-heated valves, 3 of which were proposed for molten salt reactor experiment operational valves, were operated in the molten salt reactor experiment engineering-test loop. The valves are located in the test loop so that salt may be diverted to either of two drain tanks. Reservoirs are placed on the vertical risers to ensure that the freeze zones will not run dry following a drain. Helium was permitted to flow through one valve and reservoir to check the operation of the reservoir after a system dump. The other valve was closed during this operation. The gas pressure was then equalized between the drain tank and circulating system, the valve was frozen, and x-ray photographs were taken of the valve assembly. The photographs indicated that sufficient salt remained in the valve to make a seal. The valve proved to be gas tight when refrozen. The valve to the flush tank was operated with coolant salt through 40 cycles without difficulty. The melt time varied from about 3 min at 1.5 to 2 kw of input to about 15 min when the only heat provided was from losses from the loop. A prototype, clamshell heater-insulation unit for the molten salt reactor experiment piping was built and tested. When the pipe wall was maintained at the design temperature of 1200°F, there was a heat loss of 550 Watts from a 1 foot length of 4 inch pipe. The average surface temperature of the insulation was 240°F except at the latch closure, where the temperature was 450°F. Heaters of this type were eliminated from the molten salt reactor experiment design because of their high heat loss and the difficulty in their removal and installation with remote maintenance tools. The reactor vessel is surrounded by a furnace containing 63 hairpin resistance heaters. The heaters are nested in nine banks of 2-inch stainless steel tubes, each bank of tubes being replaceable separately. An Inconel-sheet reflector and ceramic insulation are provided to minimize heat losses from the furnace. A test mockup of a full-size bank of heaters was set up in order to evaluate heater and furnace performance and replaceability. Both Inconel and stainless steel heaters were used. The system was operated for 3000 hours without difficulty. Visual inspection was made of the heaters after 576 hours and again at 3000 hours. There was little change in the appearance of the equipment. The entire inside of the furnace, including the heaters, had oxidized to a soft black, but there was no indication of severe attack in the form of flaking. The Inconel heaters appeared in better condition than the stainless steel heaters. The stainless steel containment tubes had a brassy-to-black mottled appearance, compared with a uniform black on the Inconel. The reflector and heat sink faces were also uniformly blackened. The organic binder in the Cerafelt insulation had been burned out to a depth of 1-1/2 to 2 inches at the hot face. The insulation had little remaining structural strength, although the insulating qualities were unaffected. Shrinkage of the insulating material was 1.5 to 2%. Shrinkage of the insulation on a system of a size comparable to the 9 feet high and 4 feet wide system discussed here causes serious heat losses unless some provision is made to avoid air leakage. Leakage on the test stand was stopped by plugging the cracks with Fiberfrax, a loose-wool high-temperature insulation. Tests on commercial high-temperature insulation materials are currently underway, with one sample showing no shrinkage at operating temperatures. When the experimental apparatus was designed, the total heat loss was estimated to be 5 kW with the heat-sink at 1000°F. Heat losses caused by insulation shrinkage, warping of the test stand, etc., made it necessary initially to increase the input power to 14.6 kW to achieve 1000°F operation of the heat sink. After the air leaks were stopped, the average input power was 5.1 kW for 1OOO°F at the heat sink, with no heat being removed by the coolant tubes in the sink. Runs were made also with various rates of heat withdrawal, but these data have not yet been analyzed. Preliminary estimates indicate 15 kW can be supplied with the heaters operating at a maximum temperature of 1400°F and the heat sink at 975 degrees Farenheit. The system for removing after-heat from each molten salt reactor experiment drain tank has 32 thimbles projecting into the molten salt. Inside each 1.5-inch thimble is a 1-inch bayonet boiler tube in which steam is generated at low pressure. There is air in the gap between the thimble and the bayonet tube. Three full-scale thimbles were installed into a tank to be filled with a mixture of carbonate salts for testing. Preliminary tests without salt are in progress to obtain the system heat losses and the radiant-heat transfer coefficients in the cooling tubes. After salt is added, the cooling capacity of each tube will be determined, control of the steaming rate will be investigated, and the ability of the system to withstand thermal shocks will be tested. A schematic layout of the molten salt reactor experiment sampler-enricher system for the primary loop. The components and operating techniques are similar to those reported previously. When the location of the molten salt reactor experiment primary pump was changed, the angle of inclination of the transfer tube which connects the pump bowl with the dry box was increased from 45° to 54 and 1/2 degrees. This aids in inserting the capsule. The location of the dry box was also changed from the south side of the reactor pit to the east side. In order to repair the sampler-enricher system components located outside the reactor cell, a reliable maintenance valve must be provided. A solder freeze valve was being considered because of its potential reliability. In initial tests, a l inch valve of this type appeared to perform as expected, with an acceptable leak rate of < 10 to the power of -8 cubic centimeters of helium per second. A full-sized 1-1/2 inch single-seal INOR-8 valve using the same solder was then constructed and thermal cycled 22 times. The valve was at the operating temperature of 1500°F for a total of 29 and 1 half hours. Three cycles failed completely to seal, and the remaining cycles were not consistent in the measured leak rates. This apparent unreliability has not been explained, but examination is continuing. For reactor use, a buffered double-sealing valve would be required. Because of the apparent unreliability noted above and the complications produced by the gas controls necessary to make the double-solder seal, an alternative design is being prepared. This uses a buffered double-sealing gate valve. In order to prevent oxygen contamination of the sample being isolated and of the circulating fuel, the oxide film on the copper sample capsule must be removed. A pretreatment consisting of 4 hours of hydrogen firing at 1475°F removed the oxide film from the capsule. On the basis that molten fluoride salt does not wet the surface of oxide-free copper metal, an attempt was made to prepare a reusable capsule from which a single slug of salt would be removed. However, the salt adheres to the metal surface tightly enough to prevent its removal without damage to the capsule. A capsule was then designed from which the salt can be completely removed by crushing the capsule. The salt is then removed in the form of a coarse powder. Capsules of two diameters have been tested. Preliminary crushing tests in a hot cell indicated that the salt would crush out of the larger capsule more easily. The upper portion of the smaller one tended to collapse, trapping salt in the lower part. A transport container was designed which will seal the hydrogen-fired capsule in a dry, inert atmosphere for shipment to the sampler dry box and for transporting the salt-filled capsule to the hot cells. The transport container is inserted into the dry box through a buffered double-sealing section located above the removal valve. The seal provides a purge zone to prevent the contamination of the dry box with oxygen and the release of fissionproduct gases from the dry box to the atmosphere. The leak rate of the container and the seal section will be tested after each installation has been completed. Detail design of the various components of the sampler-enricher system is in progress. Preliminary design of the transfer tube, the maintenance valve, and the operational valve are complete. A preliminary instrumentation flow sheet is also complete. Additional tests were conducted in the one-fifth-scale molten salt reactor experimental core model. Heat transfer coefficients were determined experimentally in the lower head of the one-fifth-scale core model at the reactor center line. From this it can be seen that the character of flow in the lower head changes from turbulent at the rated flow rate to laminar at a reduced value of the flow rate. Reactor Vessel Head, Based on Measurements in the One-Fifth-Scale Model. Fuel-age measurements were determined throughout the entire lower head of the one-fifth-scale model; however, most of these measurements were made with a reactor configuration which has since been modified slightly. From these earlier measurements it was concluded that the most critical region, that is to say, the region with the highest combination of fuel age, power density, and importance was at the reactor center line. For the present core configuration, the fuel ages were redetermined along the center line. It is not apparent why the fuel age is at a maximum at about 2 inches from the wall. It may indicate a zone of recirculation of the fuel. Another possibility is that the mere existence of the probe in the model has changed the flow characteristics. At any rate, the point of greatest interest is that next to the wall. If, however, the character of flow has changed from turbulent to laminar when the flow rate is reduced as proposed above, then it seems reasonable to expect the constant in the above equation to change. Based on heat transfer coefficients, fuel ages and power-density distributions in the fuel and vessel wall, the outside-wall temperature of the lower head of the reactor vessel at the center line position has been estimated to be 1215°F, which is 40°F above the inlet temperature of the reactor. This wall temperature rises to 1226°F at 50% of design flow rate. This estimate is with the reactor operating at design conditions and with no solids deposited at the wall. It should be noted that after the above measurements were made, the design of the reactor drain line was modified. The drain line now projects above the wall at the center line of the head, and some minor changes may be produced in the flow distributions reported above. Experiments were conducted with the one-fifth-scale model to determine the disposition of particulate matter in the core. The particles could result from at least two sources: corrosion of the containment material and oxidation of the fuel. For these tests, molybdenum powder with an average diameter of about 5 u was used. This simulated 25-year particles with a specific gravity of about 10 in the fuel salt. In one typical run, 70 g of molybdenum powder was added to the lower head of the model, and the model was operated at the design flow rate for a total of 40 hours. After the first 21 hours, the model was disassembled and it was found that about two-thirds of the powder had been swept out and that the rest had piled up in the center of the lower head. Again, after a total of 40 hours, about two-thirds of the remaining powder had been swept out. Indications were that these particular particles would have eventually been completely removed from the lower head of the model. It should be noted however that one major difference between the model and the reactor is that the model is operated in a once-through system, and as the solids are swept out of the lower head they are carried to the drain. In the reactor the solids remain in the system and may settle out again. If a drain line were simulated in the model it would probably be a worse case than that tested because it would provide a stagnant corner in which solids might accumulate. These same particles were tested at 60% of the design flow rate, and it appeared that very few if any of the particles were swept out of the lower head. Tests were also conducted using 200 to 500-u particles of specific gravity 10 which were simulated. These particles definitely settled in the lower head and there were no indications that they would be swept out even at the design flow rate. One proposed cause for fluid-dynamic-induced power oscillations in the molten salt reactor experiment core is due to the character of flow in the fuel channels. The Reynolds number of the fuel in the center most channels is about 3500, therefore, the flow is in the transition region, a region often thought of as oscillating between laminar and turbulent flow. Such oscillations are likely causes for power oscillations in the reactor. An almost full-scale model of four parallel fuel channels was built and tested in two different ways. First, a visual method was used. With a double refracting solution of Milling Yellow dye and two mutually perpendicular polarized plates, it was possible to see clearly the transition between laminar and turbulent flow. The transition was smooth and continuous, and no significant oscillatory action was detected. The second method of detecting oscillations was by measuring the fluid pressure drop along the length of the channels and between the channels. A manometer that would react significantly to at least 5-cps pressure oscillations was used for these measurements. The model was operated from Reynolds numbers of 1000 to 4000, and again no oscillations that could be regarded as significant were detected. If oscillations faster than 5 cps occurred, then at any one time there would be about 12 oscillations in the same fuel channel, and the effects would probably cancel. Another possible source of fluid-dynamic-induced power oscillations is from short circuiting of the fuel through the lower head. This is possible because the lower head is basically a cavity, not a channeled system. The swirl killers provide partial but not complete channels. If a fraction of the fuel does short circuit through the lower head, then a corresponding amount of fuel must reside there a little longer. This results in the short-circuiting fraction entering the core at a cooler temperature than the other fraction. Tests were conducted in the one-fifth-scale model by injecting salt into the lower head at a constant rate and measuring the oscillations of the fluid conductivity at the outlet. Based on these tests, the power level in the molten salt reactor experiment should not oscillate on either side of the mean by more than 0.03% as a result of short circuiting of the fuel in the lower head of the reactor vessel. The loop for testing the full-scale core model has been completed. The pressure vessel of the model has been received and is being installed in the loop. The core internals - that is, the core blocks, core support, and core shell - are scheduled to be delivered in September. Laboratory tests were conducted to determine the efficiency of titanium sponge as a getter for removing oxygen from a helium stream. The test unit consisted of a 3 cm diameter and 25-50 cm long titanium bed. Runs were made at flow rates up to liters/min and at bed temperatures of 600-1200°F. By using an inlet concentration of 100 parts per million (Og) by volume, outlet concentrations below 1 part per million (Og) were obtained at 1200°F. Similar results were obtained at 1000°F provided that the flow rate was maintained at 2 liters/min or less. Efficiency increased with temperature and decreased as the flow rate was increased. Oxygen analyses of the effluent gas were made by gas chromatography. The results were somewhat erratic, and confirming tests will be made using an electrolytic type of analyzer. Since the test results were encouraging, a full-scale oxygen removal unit was designed for testing under the maximum operating conditions of the cover-gas supply system. The design and water testing of the fuel pump have been completed, and the thermal analysis is essentially complete. The variable-frequency supply for the fuel-pump drive motor has been received, and the contract has been placed for the pump drive motors. Project review of the pump design has begun, and fabrication of the prototype pump and hot-test stand has restarted after satisfactory weld repairs were made to the INOR-8 volute casting. Water testing of the fuel pump was completed, and a report issued. Tests were performed to obtain the pump performance, priming, coastdown and fountain-flow characteristics, relative effectiveness of the xenon-removal configuration to strip dissolved carbon dioxide, and to prove baffle configurations that control the behavior of liquid in the pump tank. Initially, at the lower flows, the pump head was found to be 6 to 10 feet lower than the data published by the vendor of the impeller and volute. After insertion of a baffle in the inlet to reduce prerotation and to increase the head at lower flows, the maximum deviations in head were still negative but had been reduced to 1 foot at 1300 rotations per minute for flow range 800 -2000 gallons per minute, 1 and 1 half foot at 1150 rotations per minute for flow range of 600-1600 gallons per minute, and 3 feet at 860 rotations per minute for flow range of 400 - 1200 gallons per minute. During the test of a salt pump, a mechanical electrical failure caused the test to be terminated. There was no evidence of salt collecting in the off-gas line or spark-plug risers in the pump tank. Inventory of the lubricant showed a discrepancy between the measured loss from the reservoir and the measured leakages. The pump-tank offgas was sampled for possible oil leakage into the fuel system. Spectrographic analysis of the gas samples did not show any trace of elements which would result from thermal decomposition of oil in the pump tank. The offgas was run continuously through a liquid-nitrogen cold trap for 24 hours during each of two tests, with no evidence of oil collecting in the trap. In a third test, the offgas was passed through the cold trap for five days without oil collecting in the trap. This pump test was not restarted because back-diffusion tests will be performed in the prototype fuel-pump test, and the plugging of gas lines with condensed vapors of molten salt will be further investigated in a static test. A back-diffusion experiment was conducted in the before mentioned pump test to determine the rate of back diffusion of krypton 85 from the pump tank up the shaft annulus and into the catch basin against the downward stream of helium, and to determine the flow rate of helium required to prevent excessive radiation damage to the oil leakage in the catch basin. The experimental data was taken with a pump-tank pressure of 10 pounds per square inch. A lower pressure would probably decrease the concentration ratio due to increased sweep gas velocities down the shaft. The permissible radiation dose rate to the catch-basin oil leakage has been assumed to be 10^7 rads a day, based on the premise that any incremental volume of oil will drain from the catch basin within a 24-hour period and will retain its fluid properties up to a dosage of 10^7 rads. The maximum permissible concentration ratios for various sweep gas flows can be calculated from the experimental data, the permissible dose rate, and the pump-tank activity level at the particular sweep gas flow. Maximum permissible concentration ratios of 8.7 x 10^-4 and 1.26 x 10^-3 were calculated for the pump-tank activity levels resulting from sweep-gas flow rates of 694 and 3470 standard cubic centimeters per minute, respectively. The permissible concentration ratio of 8.7 x 10^-4 can be obtained on the pump with a sweep-gas flow of approximately 2000 standard cubic centimeters per minute. The back-diffusion equipment is being modified to conduct experiments on the prototype fuel pump. The design of the prototype fuel pump has been completed. Fabrication of the rotary element is about 75% complete, and the pump tank is about 25% complete. Four fuel-pump volute castings and two fuel-pump impeller castings were received from the foundry. Two of the volutes have been weld repaired, and a third is ready for weld repair, which provides one volute for the prototype fuel pump and two for the molten salt reactor experiment fuel pump. The leading edges of the vanes of one impeller casting were built up with weld metal, and a second impeller is satisfactory as cast. A third impeller will be cast later. The variable-frequency power supply for the fuel-pump drive motor has been delivered and is being installed for testing on the fuel-pump prototype. The contract for the drive motor was let, and delivery is expected on January 1, 1962. The fabrication of the prototype test loop has been completed except for the pump tank. Assembly is about 50% complete. The instrumentation and controls panels were completed and installed. Gas and oil lines have been run from the control station to convenient stopping points on the loop, and installation will be resumed as soon as the pump tank is available. Drawings of the rotary portion of the reactor fuel pump have been submitted for project review and approval prior to placing an order for fabrication. Fabrication will begin immediately upon approval. The drawings for the stationary element of the pump will be submitted for project review and approval as soon as the thermal analysis is complete. Fabrication will be initiated following hot test of the prototype fuel pump. Drawing and vessel calculations of the pump components, comprising primary nuclear containment, namely, the drive-motor vessel, bearing housing, and pump tank, are being submitted to Inspection Engineering for review. As a result of temperature distribution obtained by the GHT code, the design of the volute support cylinder was modified to reduce window width by half and center the windows on the midplane of the volute support cylinder. Reducing window width in the original position was relatively ineffective. Calculations to determine the effect of varying the flow rate of cooling air on the surface temperature of the spherical shell have been completed. Since the calculations are based on no meridional heat flow, the values are useful as a guide only. Mechanical and thermal stresses have been calculated using both an ORACLE code and an IBM 7090 code. Thermal stress calculations indicate that a small quantity of air cooling will be required on the fuel-pump tank during zero-power operation to avoid excessive strain cycling during reactor power changes. The calculations also indicate that forced air cooling of the coolant pump will not be required since the stress range between zero-power and 10-Mw operation is relatively small. Calculations have been initiated to determine the necessity for variable control of cooling air flow for the fuel-pump tank under all operating conditions from zero to full power. The effect of the thermal gradient on the thermal stresses in the sphere is being determined with the IBM 7090 code which uses tangent cone geometry in place of the sphere. Tests have been completed to determine the feasibility of conducting the coolant pump hot tests in the fuel-pump volute. The tests indicated that radial hydraulic imbalance would cause rubbing between rotary and stationary parts. It is planned to conduct the hot-proof test of the rotary element for the molten salt reactor experiment coolant pumps in the hot-test stand for the fuel pump, using a fuel-pump impeller. The water-test rig is being modified to permit hydraulic tests of the coolant pump impeller and volute combination. The two natural convection loops were shut down and examined, as reported in the metallurgy section of this report. The engineering-test loop began operation April 20 with molten salt reactor experiment coolant salt. The purpose of the first test was to evaluate the effectiveness of the flushing operation by following the oxide content of the salt immediately after filling the system for the first time. The loop remained in operation, isothermally at 1100°F, for approximately 1300 hours while 50 samples were removed from the pump bowl and drain tank. The samples were removed in a hydrogen-fired copper dip tube by the use of a ball valve and sliding seal arrangement. Both the dip tube and the sample were kept in a helium atmosphere until loaded into the analyst's dry box. The results of the oxygen analyses were so scattered that it was not possible to determine how much oxygen had been dissolved or whether the solubility had been exceeded. The variation reported in oxygen content was from 300 to 1,100 parts per million. Between the 950th and 1100th hours, approximately 35 grams of beryllium oxide pellets were added to the system through the pump bowl. This was sufficient to raise the entire oxygen content by about 200 parts per million, but this difference did not show up in the analyses. From this and other tests on the accuracy of the oxygen analysis, a reevaluation of equipment and technique was begun by the analysts. The engineering test loop was dumped after 1300 hours of operation to begin other tests. The chromium content of the salt increased from 170 parts per million to 370 parts per million during the above operation. This represents leaching of all the chromium from about a 1/2 thousandth of an inch thickness of the metal surfaces of the loop. The chromium pickup is believed to be reasonable for the initial operation of an Inconel system. The first attempt to dump the loop after 1300 hours of operation required over an hour, which is excessive. The difficulty is thought not to have been in the freeze valve but in the drain line. The alternate valve, which had seen the same conditions, opened in normal time. The partial plug may have been caused by the settlement of undissolved beryllium oxide particles added to the loop a week earlier. An attempt to establish a similar plug will be made by adding additional beryllium oxide in the same manner. The tube has plugged twice, once during a draining operation and again when attempts were made to duplicate the original conditions. It was later realized that the pressure in the pump bowl could increase faster than the pressure in the bubble tube, causing salt to enter the tube. The system volume of the bubble level tube was therefore decreased by a factor of 3, and with the same flow rate and pressure change rate, the tube did not plug. Since then the bubble tube has been used for 11 fill and drain operations and has been valved off for 700 hours and valved on for 300 hours of level indication, all without difficulty. An 8 inch diameter vertical graphite container with a longitudinal frozen-salt seal access has been designed and is being fabricated of INOR-8 plate. The graphite, on order, will have the same dimensions and properties as that for the molten salt reactor experiment core. The installation will allow the examination of the graphite after various operations, without contamination by air. A dry box will be lowered over the access flange to the freeze seal after the test loop has been drained and cooled. Conventional gasket materials make connection between the dry box handling facility and the graphite container while the box is evacuated and purged of oxygen gas. The access flange is opened through the use of the glove ports and the hoist. Two sealed graphite carriers are provided so that a full length 65-1/4 inch sample may be added or removed in an inert atmosphere. The access flange contains a cone-shaped plug, with cooling-air coils to form the frozen-salt seal in an annulus. A standard metal oval ring gasket is used for the gas seal. The main purpose of the test is to verify laboratory-scale tests for removing oxygen gas from the graphite, ease of graphite removal from the container, wetting characteristics, and completeness of draining. The dual maintenance approach, using both semidirect and remote techniques as described in the design section, is being implemented. Access to a small component, using the portable maintenance shield and remote manual techniques, will require the removal of three or four of these beams. Replacement of a large component by use of remote maintenance techniques3 will require the removal of all the beams. They will be handled by the building 30-ton crane and a directly-operated lift fixture. To obtain access to a small component, the seal membrane will be cut away from the two beams to be removed and the portable maintenance shield set over them and opened. The shield beams will then be removed, using the 30-ton crane and an automatic lifting tong which can attach to and release from the beams without direct attendance, and the portable maintenance shield will be closed. The operations of removing the lower shield beams and closing the portable maintenance shield will be conducted from the shielded maintenance control room. Maintenance or replacement of the component will be accomplished by working directly through the portable shield. To replace a large component, the entire seal membrane will be removed. The manipulator and television system will be set up over the primary cell. From this point until the lower shield beams are replaced, all work must be conducted from the maintenance control room. All the lower shield beams and the two support beams will be removed. Maintenance or replacement will be accomplished with the manipulator, with vision provided by the stereo-television system and through shielded windows in the maintenance control room. The remote-maintenance mockup of the molten salt reactor experiment is being constructed to develop, test, and improve maintenance tools and techniques. It occupies the space left vacant following dismantling of the remote-maintenance demonstration facility. Most of the new structural steel was erected, and the pump, reactor thermal shield, and some piping were installed. Shop-fabricated models of the heat exchanger and primary loop piping are being installed. Heater, component and instrument replacement appear to be straightforward maintenance operations, except in areas of crowding, such as around the pump. Extensive practice in the closely-duplicated pump mockup will resolve any problem in this area. At present, it appears that the inventory of special long-handled tools will be small because many operations have been reduced to the rotation of a standard hex nut or to the vertical translation of a standard eyebolt. Making and breaking freeze flanges, which is the primary concern of the mockup, includes removing the freeze-flange clamp, stowing the clamp, jacking the piping to separate the faces of the flange for gasket replacement or to replace a component, and providing force and visibility to re-position misaligned flanges. Test equipment for this process has been designed and is being fabricated. Conceptual layout drawings for a portable molten salt reactor experiment maintenance facility were completed. Orders were placed for approximately 80% of all materials required for fabrication, and most of these items have been received. Component detailing has begun. To standardize tools and techniques, all points in the salt-system piping that will require a braze joint in the event of component replacement will be 1-1/2 inch schedule 4O pipe run on a slope 3° from horizontal. A clear or readily clearable space 3 feet along the axis of the pipe and 1 feet on either side is required at each point. A permanent base-plate 3 feet long and 2 feet wide, mounted 1 feet below and parallel to the axis of the pipe and access from above are also required at each point. After testing several designs, it was tentatively decided to use a sleeve joint with a 1-inch engagement and a 3° taper. The male stub remaining in the system will be machined in place to the required taper. The replacement component will carry the female sleeve with the 82% Au - 18% Ni braze metal pre-placed. The present test pieces use two braze-wire rings pre-placed in grooves in the sleeve. The Metallurgy Division is developing a technique to tin the sleeve with about 0.005 inch of braze metal so that only one surface will have to wet during brazing. The brazing will be accomplished by heating the joint to about 1800°F in an induction furnace. The furnace requires electrical leads, cooling water, and purge gas. The furnace will be pre-placed with the new component and will be destroyed upon completion of the braze. A sectioned joint was completed. Although brazing metal did not flow the entire length of the annulus, an adequate seal was formed. Development efforts are continuing in order to ensure wetting of the entire annulus. Tools for use in the reactor have been designed to hold the pipe, cut it, machine the taper, and assemble the joint. These will be tested in simulated reactor geometries. The molten-salt reactor program requires simple, leak-detectable, radiation-resistant joints to permit component replacement and maintenance, and several types of disconnects have been developed. The integral dual-seal ring joint closed by steel spring clamps offers a satisfactory disconnect for many reactor applications in the process temperature range 100 to 1500°F. Remote operation is facilitated because only low torque is required to operate the two bolts on the clamp. Use of the metal-to-metal seal eliminates material radiation damage problems. Integral ring joints were selected in preference to separate rings to prevent ring buckling when the connecting flange halves are slightly cocked on makeup, to reduce the number of seal contacts from four to two, to reduce the probability of foreign particles into seal surfaces, and to eliminate the need to handle gaskets during remote operation of the disconnect. Two integral ring-joint spring-clamp flange sets were designed, built, and tested for coupling a and 1-1/2 inch pipe, respectively. Final helium leak rates with the 1/2 inch unit following eight assemblies and a total of 1020 thermal readings above background were observed in a helium mass-spectrometer test on both inner and outer seals, assuring a seal tightness in excess of 1.3 x 10 to the power of -8 atmospheric cubic centimeters per second. The joint was also thermal cycled with bending moments of 4200 inch-lb applied both parallel and perpendicular to the clamp separation line. No detectable leakage was noted. A combination ring-joint Flexitallic disconnect was developed to serve as a multiple disconnect in crowded spaces. The joint contains a tight ring at the periphery, and four 1/2-inch lines, each with a Flexitallic gasket. It is most useful where small amounts of interline leakage can be tolerated but leakage to the outside cannot be accepted. Early difficulties in achieving tight ring seals were eliminated by modifying the usual flange-assembly procedure. In the successful procedure, the center of the joint is loaded temporarily with a C-clamp before the flange bolts are tightened. Seals can then be consistently made with bolt-torque loads well within the maximum limits recommended for the bolt threads. Proper seals can be obtained by using this procedure, even with rings manufactured only to commercial specifications. The addition of Flexitallic inserts appears to add no further difficulties. No leakages greater than 1 x 10 to the power of -6 standard cubic centimeters per second were apparent for ring seals in tests run with oval and octagonal rings and four 1/2 inch 150 pound Flexitailic inserts reused for three successive assemblies. The flange was successfully steam-cycled to 250°F with 500 pounds per square inch helium pressurization in the buffer zone of the ring. Development testing with cone-seat disconnects demonstrated that such joints can be made to adhere to the low leak rates required in reactor service. Both single and multiple units were tested. Cone-seat units represent a great simplification over other commonly used metal-to-metal seals for quick disconnects. Low-torque single bolt loading, compactness, minimum space required for assembly, interchangeability of parts, and inexpensive construction are some of the major advantages of this seal. The cone-seat disconnects are well suited for reactor leak-detector-line disconnects. Development work with yoke-mounted 1/4- to 1/2 inch pipe dual-seal block disconnects revealed that seals fashioned to variations of the ring-joint geometry work reliably repeatedly. Test blocks with both solid and slotted integral oval rings operating within 60° included-angle grooves were operated in excess of 12 assemblies and 30 thermal cycles from 80 to 325°F, with leak rates of less than 8 x 10 to the power of -7 standard cubic centimeters per second as measured with a helium mass spectrometer. Additional testing is planned. Two commercial quick-disconnect couplings were received from On-Mark Company. Preliminary testing indicated good sealing action at room temperatures. However, on thermal cycling up to 325°F, one unit failed to seal after ten downeycle cycles. Visual inspection revealed considerable peeling of the silver plating from the seals. Additional testing is scheduled. Preliminary design of a high-pressure, electrically heated, single-tube, steam-generator - superheater was initiated. The generator would be a bayonettube unit of the type proposed for the experimental molten-salt fueled 30-Mw power reactor. Completion of the design was postponed until the feasibility of a separator that will fit the small available space is determined. A test chamber has been designed and is currently being constructed to test separators for use in the steam generator. Air and water will be used in the tests. The water carryover rate in the air and the air carryunder rate in the return water will be determined for several air and water flow rates. Development of a continuous level-element for use in measurement of molten salt level in the Molten Salt Reactor Experiment (MSRE) fuel and coolant salt pump bowl is continuing. As reported previously, a graphite float assembly will be used in the level element of the reactor pump bowl, and an INOR-8 hollow ball float will be used in the level element of the coolant salt pump bowl. Design of the graphite float and core assembly has been completed, and two prototype units have been fabricated. This assembly has been designed to provide sufficient buoyancy, after absorption of fuel salt by the graphite, to support the core assembly and to overcome frictional forces. A molten salt-level test stand for use in testing prototype level transmitters was designed. Construction of this stand is nearing completion. The major effort in this program has been devoted to the development of a differential transformer and core assembly which will be capable of continuous operation in the range of 1200 to 1300°F and which will not exhibit excessive shifts in zero, span, and phase of the transmitted signal as the temperature varies over the operating range of 850 to 1300°F. Several transformer designs have been tested during the course of this work. A transformer design using a ceramic-insulated nickel wire, manufactured by the Secon Metals Corporation, with Fiberfrax paper insulation between the windings, showed some initial promise of success but failed when operated at elevated temperatures. Two transformers of this type were tested. One developed intermittent shorts after 12 hours operation at 1100°F. This failure produced rapid and erratic changes in the output signal. Subsequent examination revealed that the insulation had cracked off the wire in places, and several turns were shorted. Another transformer of this type failed in the same manner at 900°F. A transformer was designed with three concentric, unfired, grade A lava sleeves providing insulation for bare nickel wire wound into threaded grooves machined into the inner two sleeves forming the primary and secondary of the transformer. The threads act as insulation for the wire. The external sleeve serves to keep the wire in place with sufficient clearances allowed to permit differential expansion between the wire and the sleeve. This type of transformer has accumulated more than two weeks of operation at temperatures in excess of 1200°F, including 24 hours of operation at 1500°F and several periods when the temperature was reduced to room temperature. So far, there is no evidence of insulation failure. Calibration data obtained from this transformer are also very encouraging. Several figures show calibration curves obtained at various temperatures with constant current excitation and with constant voltage excitation. Note that the sensitivity of the transformer, as indicated by the slope of the curves, increases with temperature when constant current excitation is used and remains essentially constant when constant voltage excitation is used. This result was entirely unexpected. It had been expected that the increase in transformer losses would result in a decrease in sensitivity as the temperature was increased when constant voltage excitation was used. A probable explanation for the increase in sensitivity is found in the data presented in a different figure. These data, extracted from the literature, indicate that the intrinsic induction of Armco iron increases with temperature at low excitation levels. This increase in permeability would result in an increase in coupling, with a resultant increase in transformer sensitivity. The fact that the increase in sensitivity due to the permeability effect almost exactly offsets the decrease due to transformer losses is apparently a fortunate coincidence. The offset between the curves discussed above is due to residual voltage capacitively coupled through the transformer. This offset can be eliminated by appropriate circuitry in the receiving instrument. The curie point of the Armco iron core occurs at 1400°F. This effect has been verified experimentally. Tests have shown that the transformer becomes insensitive and signal output repeatedly falls to zero when the temperature is raised above 1400°F. This characteristic is not believed to be objectionable since the point where the failure occurs is above the expected operating temperature range and since the failure is in a safe direction. However, an attempt is being made to extend the useable range of the transformer. A cobalt core, which has a higher Curie point, has been fabricated. Tests will be run to determine the feasibility of using this core with the present transformer design. The lava-insulated transformer assembly is being mounted on an Inconel coil form which will give mechanical protection to the coil. The complete transformer assembly will then be tested to determine whether the transformer characteristics are adversely affected by the coil form. If the results are satisfactory, a prototype level transmitter will be assembled and tested on the molten-salt-level test stand. As previously reported, a conductivity-type level indicator is being developed for use in the single-point measurement of the molten-salt level in the Molten Salt Reactor Experiment (MSRE) storage tanks. Extensive measurements of the resistivity of a molten salt have been made at various voltages and frequencies, a new probe-design concept has been developed and tested, and a conceptual design has been made for a two-point level probe suitable for use in the molten salt reactor experiment application. The salt resistivity was investigated to determine the reason for and nature of the observed changes in the apparent resistivity of the salt with changes in excitation voltage and to determine whether any barrier or interface effects existed which would require the excitation voltage to be above some minimum value. A spark-plug probe was used for these measurements. With the salt in contact with the probe, a 60-cycle ac excitation voltage was applied between the probe and the salt pot. The excitation voltage was varied from 2 millivolts alternating current to 2 Volts alternating current, and the probe current was plotted as a function of excitation voltage. The plotted curve was linear over the entire range, thus indicating that there are no interface effects in the region of interest when ac excitation is used. These tests were repeated, using de excitation and with the spark plug positive in one case and negative in another. The plotted curves were not linear and their shape changed considerably when the polarity of the excitation voltage was reversed. From these tests it was concluded that a definite polarization effect exists when de excitation is used and that the use of de excitation is undesirable. Additional tests were run in which the temperature of the salt was varied, the results have yet to be interpreted. A new design for a conductivity probe was created. In previous probe designs, both the potential and excitation leads were connected at the bottom of the probe, and the signal level, when the salt was below the plug tip, was a function of the excitation current. This produced a floating-zero effect and required the detection of a small change in a relatively large voltage. In the new design, the excitation lead is connected at a point above the probe tip, and the signal is obtained by measuring the potential between the point where the excitation lead is connected and the probe tip. Since no current flows to the probe tip when the salt is below the probe, a true zero characteristic is obtained, and the signal is a small voltage deviation from zero. This can be amplified and detected. A model of this probe was constructed and tested. It has operated several hundred hours at temperature in both fuel 130 and molten salt reactor experiment reactor salts without apparent damage. A calibration curve was obtained using the molten salt reactor experiment salt. The curve was obtained by immersing the probe, which is 3/8 inch in diameter, to a known depth and recording the output signal level. This signal level was then plotted as a function of the calculated surface area exposed to the salt. Although this curve is linear, it is not expected that the probe would be useable as a continuous level indicator unless some means can be devised to compensate for changes in the resistivity of the molten salt with time. Several curves were obtained using various excitation frequencies. From these curves it can be seen that the sensitivity of the probe is increased by increasing the excitation frequency. The use of higher excitation frequencies has the additional advantage that stray 60-cycle pickup voltages can be rejected with appropriate filter circuitry. Based on the new two-level conductance probe design concept that is compatible with the configuration of the molten salt reactor experiment storage tanks. Potential lead 1 is connected to the high-level contact plate. Potential lead 3 and the excitation lead are connected to the excitation ring. Potential lead 2 is connected to the high-level contact plate. Excitation voltage is applied between the excitation terminal and the mounting flange. The low-level signal is developed between potential leads 1 and 3, and the high-level signal is developed between potential leads 2 and 3. All leads are brought out through 1/4 inch INOR-8 tubes and are insulated from contact with the probe assembly except at the point of connection. The assembly is all welded, and INOR-8 is the only material which will be in contact with the salt. The assembly will be installed through a 3 inch ring-joint flange located at top center of the storage tank. A temperature-scanning system is being developed to display the output of approximately 250 thermocouples attached to the reactor system pipes and components. These thermocouples will be used to indicate the temperature of the pipes and components during system startup and shutdown operations. The display of the temperatures will be used to prevent excessive thermal stresses of the pipes and components during these operations. An operator will observe the temperature profile of the system and adjust heaters to keep the entire system at a common temperature. The scanner will consist of three separate systems, each capable of handling 100 thermocouples. The thermocouple signals from the pipes and components in one part of the reactor system will be switched at a 2000-point-per-second rate and compared to a reference thermocouple attached to the pipe or component having the slowest thermal response. If a temperature difference, either high or low, exists between the commutated thermocouples and the reference couple, an alarm signal is produced. The difference signal is simultaneously transmitted to a 17-inch oscilloscope for display. If all signals are of the same value, a straight line will be seen on the scope. The alarm setpoints, high and low, are adjustable through the alarm discriminator. The signal is amplified to a suitable level to drive the oscilloscope and alarm discriminator. The absolute-temperature value of the commutated signals will be determined by a spare thermocouple located adjacent to the reference couple. This couple signal will be measured by a precise temperature indicator. Then, knowing the calibration of the difference signal, all the temperatures can be determined from the scope display. A separate part of the reactor system will be monitored by each 100-point scanner system. For example, the coolant system, fuel system, and fill-and-drain system will each be monitored by a separate scanner. The operator will monitor the scopes and adjust appropriate heaters to hold the temperatures constant. If a section of the pipe or a component deviates from the reference couple, an alarm is sounded. The operator then identifies the high- or low-temperature position from the scope display and makes the necessary heater adjustment. The development of techniques and procedures for attaching sheathed thermocouples to INOR-8 pipe walls and vessels is continuing. Sample quantities of 1/16 inch outer diameter, two-wire, single-conductor, and 1/8 inch outer diameter, two-conductor Inconel and INOR-8 sheathed thermocouples have been procured for use in this program. There are some promising methods for attaching thermocouples to INOR-8 pipes and vessels. In all the methods a grounded hot junction is formed by fusing the conductors into the end seal of the sheaths, using Heliarc welding techniques. It was originally expected that attachments could be made by field brazing the couples to the INOR-8 pipe or vessel with 82% Au - 18% Ni brazing alloy. Although adaptor lugs have been successfully brazed to thermocouple sheaths, the results of field brazing tests have so far been unsatisfactory. Though the results of experiments to date are inconclusive, the use of Heliarc-welded INOR-8 adaptor lug attachments appears promising. Since brazing is preferable to Heliarc welding when thermocouples are to be attached to thin wall components such as radiator tubes, efforts to develop satisfactory field brazing techniques will continue. There is a method of installing 1/16 inch, single-conductor, two-wire, sheathed couples on pipe that is currently being evaluated. The sheaths are insulated from each other and from ground except at the hot junction. This method of installation has the advantage that detachment of a thermocouple from the pipe or vessel will be detected with conventional burn-out circuitry in the receiving instrument. Insulation of the sheath from ground also increases the effectiveness of the sheath in shielding the thermocouple wire from stray magnetic fields produced by currents in adjacent pipe heaters. In the installation shown, ceramic beads are used for insulation. Other types of insulations are being investigated for use in areas where space limitations will not permit the use of beads. In addition to permitting the detection of detached couples, the use of 1/16 inch, single-conductor, two-wire sheathed couples offers the additional advantages of smaller size and simplification of installation of cold end seals. The temperature coefficient of reactivity in the molten salt reactor experiment arises from two principal effects, namely, the expansion of the fuel salt due to a rise in salt temperature and the shift in the neutron temperature of the reactor due to a rise in graphite temperature. Both effects increase the leakage from the reactor and produce a negative temperature coefficient. The calculation of the temperature coefficient was done according to the assumptions that  the neutron temperature and graphite temperature are identical, the effects of changes in reactor size and fuel channel size are negligible, the Fermi age is a function only of the graphite density, a two-group, bare reactor model is adequate, resonance escape probability, fast effect, and neutron reproduction factor of Uranium 235 are independent of temperature, and microscopic transport cross sections are independent of temperature. Two-group, two-dimensional calculations were done using the IBM 7090 program Equipoise-3 to obtain estimates of the worth of the currently proposed control rods in the molten salt reactor experiment. The reactor was assumed to be a rectangular parallelepiped with a square base, with radial geometric buckling equal to the geometric buckling of the actual cylindrical core, and a height equal to the height of the actual cylindrical core. This assumption was convenient since x-y geometry is used in the code calculation a pseudocylinder could be constructed, but more mesh points would have to be used, with consequent increase in computing time. The graphite-sample holder was assumed to be identical to the core in these calculations. With the rods inserted, the rod regions were treated in the thermal group by a logarithmic derivative boundary condition. With the rods out, diffusion theory was applied in the rod regions. It will be noted that rod 1 and 3 individually were worth slightly more than rod 2 this is due to the flux depression caused by the INOR-8 rod thimbles. If there is an appreciable amount of INOR-8 in the sample holder, this effect will be reduced, since the presence of the sample holder was neglected in these calculations. Flux and power density distributions for the core were calculated by using a somewhat more complicated model, assuming all rods to be withdrawn. The results are flux and power-density shapes for a homogeneous bare reactor were included for comparison. The addition of the rod thimbles lowered the peak-to-average power density ratio by about 8% of the homogeneous reactor value and moved the position of peak power density to a point about 6 inches away from the centerline. The effect of the sample holder is again evident in the higher flux along traverse A-B than along A-C but since the presence of INOR-8 in the sample holder was neglected, this effect should be smaller than that shown here. Estimates were made of the gamma-ray heating in the control-rod thimbles using the IBM 7090 program Nightmare. The peak gamma-ray heat deposition rate, at the reactor midplane, was 2.5 Watts per cubic centimeter. The value at the upper end of the core was about 0.5 watts per cubic centimeter, but this value is uncertain since the method used in the Nightmare program is not applicable to two-dimensional reactors. The fast-neutron heating in the rod thimbles was estimated assuming the heating to be proportional to the fast flux and assuming that the production of a thermal neutron by slowing down represents an energy deposition of 2 MeV at the point of production. The peak heating rate in the rod thimbles with the control rods out was estimated to be 0.12 watts per cubic centimeter. Some nuclear calculations were done for molten-salt reactors with INOR-8 tubes separating the fuel salt from the graphite. The core size was assumed to be that of the present reactor, which was 54 inches in diameter and 66 inches high. Fuel volume fraction was set at 0.080 inches. Calculated total system inventories of uranium-235 were plotted as a function of tube wall thickness, with fuel volume fraction as a parameter. Results previously obtained for reactors without tubes are included for comparison. In addition to raising the uranium 235 inventory, the use of the fuel tubes decreased the magnitudes of the temperature coefficient of reactivity, the average value of the neutron reproduction factor, and the percentage of fissions caused by thermal neutrons. A preliminary estimate of the radioactive sources within the reactor cell showed that the nitrogen 16 activity from the fluorine neutron alpha reaction in the fuel salt was one of the major contributors. This estimate was based on a fission-spectrum averaged cross section and the conservative assumption that the total reactor flux had a fission spectrum. The nitrogen 16 activity has been re-estimated by integrating the reaction cross section, with the fast neutron fluxes obtained from multigroup reactor calculations. A lower value was obtained, but nitrogen 16 activity still gives an appreciable dose. At a reactor power of 10 megawatts thermal, the average production rates obtained were 1.8 x 10^9 atoms of nitrogen 16 per sec per cubic centimeter in the headers and coolant annulus, and 1.1 x 10^10 in the core proper. Two major sources of residual activity in the reactor cell will be the pump bowl and heat exchanger if appreciable quantities of fission products plate out in either of these components. The magnitude of these sources was estimated, assuming certain behavior of the fission products. In addition, the average energy release associated with the decay of these products was estimated. The residual activity in the pump bowl was based on the assumption that all daughter products of xenon and krypton plate out at the point of formation. The method of Stevenson was used to determine the formation rate of daughter products. Considering the gamma activity to be equivalent to 1-MeV photons emitted from a point source, the calculated dose rate 10 feet from the pump bowl was 1 year's operation at 10 MW. The residual activity in the heat exchanger was based on the assumption that 100% of the isotopes which might plate out on INOR-8 plated out in the heat exchanger. Assuming that both parents and daughters remained in the heat exchanger and that the gammas could be represented as about 1-Mev photons originating from a point source, the dose rate at a distance of 10 feet was 2 x 10^4 and 1.4 x 10^4 rads per hour after 10 and 30 days cooling time, respectively, following 1 years operation at 10 Mw. It was assumed that the heat loss from the primary heat exchanger through the insulation is linear with the average temperature of the metal in the heat exchanger, that there is 5-kw loss at 1200°F, and that all the energy emitted by the fission products is absorbed by the metal. Then, for 2000 lb of metal in the heat exchanger, the peak temperature was about 1350°F and occurred about 4 hours following reactor shutdown and stoppage of coolant flow. The dose rates to be expected above the reactor cell have been re-estimated, using the new values of the nitrogen 16 activity in the fuel salt and the revised layout of the fuel-salt system. Basic changes in the layout pertinent to shielding considerations consisted of the removal of the pump from directly over the reactor vessel and the removal of the INOR-8 shield located in the upper header. The resulting 2 foot diameter hole in the top of the reactor shield is to be used for removing the graphite sample and control equipment. Both a solid shield and the existence of a 1/2 inch crack between the upper shield beams has been considered. Dose-rate estimates above the crack were based on the uncollided photon flux, whereas the solid shield estimates included buildup. Self-shielding by the source and source container were included in all cases. In addition to the nitrogen 16 activity, other radiation sources considered were fission product activity, thermal-neutron capture gammas, prompt-fission gammas, and prompt fission neutrons. Results for the balance of the shield have been reported, and, except for the region above the reactor vessel, the general radiation level is less than 2.5 millirads per hour for the solid shield. It is currently planned to insert a filler material into the cracks between the upper shield beams. If the measured dose rate during reactor operation is still excessive, provisions have been made for placing additional shield material as needed. Estimates of the dose rates outside the side shield of the reactor were made considering reactor operation at 10 MW for one year and various times after shutdown, assuming that the fuel system was not drained. In obtaining these estimates, the fuel-salt-system components were considered individually. An IBM 7090 shielding calculation code prepared by E. D. Arnold was used for the calculations. Activity due to the decay of fission products was obtained from the IBM Internuc code. Other sources consisted of the saturated fission-product activity and capture gamnas in the reactor shield. The calculations included the effect of 2 inch of steel and the self-shielding associated with the source medium and source container. Examinations of eight additional INOR-8 forced-convection loops were completed during this period, concluding the investigation of long-term corrosion effects in fluoride systems. In all, 24 loops were operated under this program. With the exception of a few loops, corrosive attack was limited to the hottest segments of the loops and was in the form of a pitted surface layer. Metallographic examinations of four 20,000-hour loops showed corrosion depths generally in the range of 1/2 to 2 thousandths of an inch for systems based on lithium fluoride and sodium fluoride salt. In one of the loops which circulated a salt similar to the proposed molten salt reactor experiment fuel mixture but without zirconium tetrafluoride, the depth of attack was greater, reaching a maximum of 2 thousandths of an inch. Examination of a loop which circulated a sodium coolant salt through the system, for 19,942 hours, revealed no evidence of attack in either the hot or cold areas of the loop. However, macroscopic examination of specimens removed from the end of the cooler coil did reveal the presence of a small amount of metallic deposit. Analyses of the deposit have not been completed. The last three loops afford an evaluation of temperature effects on corrosion by the system based on lithium fluoride salt. Two of the loops, which operated at maximum temperatures of 1300°F and 1400 degrees Fahrenheit, respectively, sustained approximately the same depths of attack after 10,000 hours. One loop which operated at 1500°F, exhibited a considerably higher rate of attack, which was about 4 thousandths of an inch compared to less than 1 thousandth of an inch in only 6500 hours. Corrosion at 1500°F was manifested by subsurface void formation, and the surface film that is characteristic of the corrosion process at lower temperatures was conspicuously absent. As previously reported, tests have been in progress to investigate the compatibility of molybdenum in contact with graphite, INOR-8, and the proposed test section carried out in INOR-8 thermal convection loops which incorporated test sections containing type ROO25 graphite, molybdenum strips, and INOR-8. The graphite, in the form of cylinders 6 inches long, was encased in a 1-1/4 inch schedule 80 INOR-8 pipe section and mounted in the hot leg of the thermal convection loops. The first test contained two graphite cylinders, and the second contained four cylinders. The salt-to-graphite volume ratios of the two loops were approximately 2:1 and 1:1, respectively. The tests were terminated after 5585 and 5545 hours, respectively, and results have been obtained for the longer-duration loop. A scratch test of the molybdenum strips contained in loop 1250 showed that the surface of the strip, where in direct contact with graphite, was significantly harder than the surfaces in contact with either the salt or the INOR-8. Metallographic examination of the strips showed a layer about 0.1 thousandths of an inch thick on the surface exposed to the graphite otherwise, no apparent changes in microstructure were found as a result of the exposure conditions. Tensile tests of the molybdenum strips in both the as-received and tested condition showed qualitatively that the ultimate strength and per cent reduction in area of the molybdenum were reduced as a result of exposure. However, there was no apparent difference in the hardness of the as-tested and as-received molybdenum. Results of chemical analyses made on both the as-received and as-tested molybdenum show an increase in the chromium concentration of the molybdenum during testing. This increase is clearly indicated. Metallographic examination of INOR-8 specimens removed from the loop revealed relatively heavy surface roughening and pitting; however, examination of the as-received tubing revealed a similar surface condition. Examination of one of the INOR-8 spacers, which held the molybdenum in contact with the graphite, revealed attack in the form of surface roughening and pitting to a maximum depth of 1 mil along the inner surface, which was exposed to the salt. The outer surfaces of the spacers, which were in intimate contact with both the graphite and molybdenum, were found to have been carburized to a depth of less than 10 thousandths of an inch. Considering the difference in thermal expansion between INOR-8 and graphite, it is likely that there was a relatively large contact pressure between the graphite and INOR-8 along the carburized areas. Chemical analysis made on the as-received and as-tested salt showed the chromium content to have increased from an initial value of 550 parts per million to a final value of 960. No other changes were apparent in the salt analyses. As a consequence of recent developments to improve the weldability of INOR-8, corrosion tests have been scheduled to evaluate the resistance to fluoride attack of INOR-8 that has been modified by the addition of 2% niobium. In addition to corrosion data on 2% niobium INOR-8, these loop tests will also supply data on the corrosion properties of various types of weld junctions. Corrosion tests will be conducted in two INOR-8 & thermal-convection loops, each loop containing two tubular inserts in the hot leg. One of the inserts will be fabricated from INOR-8 modified with 2% niobium, while the other will be of standard INOR-8. The inserts will be separated from each other and the loop by spacers. They will be protected from the atmosphere by an outer jacket welded to the loop. The spacers will also function as the weld-test specimens. Corrosion studies of fused fluoride mixtures have conventionally been conducted under closely controlled test conditions to maintain a high degree of salt purity. However, maintaining such stringent control becomes problematical in the case of a large-scale reactor experiment, and there is a probability that small amounts of certain impurities, which act as strong oxidants, will be encountered throughout normal reactor operation. Examples of these impurities include moisture, dry air, oil, and combinations thereof. Accordingly, a test program was started to systematically investigate the effects of such contaminants on the corrosion behavior of fused fluoride mixtures and to define the limits of the various contaminants which can be safely allowed to enter the salt. The first series of tests was designed to establish the effect of moisture on the corrosion of INOR-8 by fused-salt mixtures. It is known that water immediately reacts with the salt to form hydrogen fluoride and oxides of the melt through hydrolysis, thus this phase of the program is being divided into two series of tests. In the first series of tests, salt mixtures containing controlled amounts of hydrogen fluoride will be circulated to study both the mechanism and rates of attack as a function of hydrogen fluoride concentration. In order to translate these results into an understanding of the corrosive effect of water, a second series of tests utilizing small static pots will be operated to determine the rate of hydrogen fluoride buildup in salts exposed to wet helium. The initial thermal-convection test under this program was terminated prematurely after 255 hours as a result of a sudden flow restriction. The test circulated a sodium fluoride zirconium tetrafluoride salt mixture to which hydrogen fluoride had been added immediately before operation. The salt mixture was a standard production batch obtained from the Reactor Chemistry Division. Before being placed in the loop, the mixture was repurified through the use of pure zirconium shavings and a hydrogen purge. Radioactive ferrous fluoride was used to monitor the progress of the repurification. Chemical analysis of the salt before and after repurification showed the nickel and iron content to be reduced, whereas the chromium content increased. After the repurification process, the loop was filled with hydrogen fluoride introduced through a dip leg attached to a salt pot at the top of the loop. The hydrogen fluoride-bearing salt was circulated through the loop under approximately a 55°F change in temperature. Determination of the amount of hydrogen fluoride introduced to the salt was impossible due to several leaks that occurred in the gas lines. However, chemical analysis of the salt circulated will provide some measure of the amount of HF absorbed. Metallographic and chemical analyses are in progress. Work is continuing to determine the solubility limit of chromium plus iron in nickel-base alloys containing 18% molybdenum over the temperature range 900 to 2000°F. The purpose is to confirm that INOR-8 will not be subject to the precipitation of intermetallic compounds when the maximum amount of alloying additions allowed by the specification are present, that is, 18% molybdenum 8% chromium 5% iron. It is also of further interest to determine the location of the solid-solution phase boundary known to exist near the upper limit of the INOR-8 compositional specification in order to establish what deviations from specifications might be permitted. The previous report summarized the results obtained from a study of the 900-to-2000°F microstructures of a series of 18% molybdenum alloys encompassing the maximum compositional limit of INOR-8. The interpretation of these results was complicated by the presence of a fine grain-boundary precipitate in the alloys over the range 1100 to 1650°F. This precipitate, thought to be a carbide, redissolved at 1800°F. Two alloys, both containing iron and chromium contents in the range 8 to 10%, retained a precipitate at 1800°F, indicating that this phase was an intermetallic compound. Based on these results, an 1800°F phase boundary was proposed. Recent efforts have been focused on confirming the proposed phase boundary. Prior to heat treating samples of these alloys within the range of 900°F to 2000°F, a decarburization treatment was carried out at 2200°F in dry hydrogen to eliminate as much carbon impurity as possible from the materials. Metallographic examination of samples receiving 100-hour heat treatments at 1800°F showed the formation of a new phase boundary. It is believed that carbon contamination may be a problem, as all the alloys generally showed a small amount of fine grain-boundary precipitate in the range of 1100°F to 1650°F. This precipitate dissolved at 1800°F in those alloys located in the single phase region of the corresponding diagram. Particles observed at 1800°F in those alloys located in the two-phase region are thus believed to be an intermetallic compound. According to this interpretation, the decarburization treatment given the alloys was insufficient in lowering the carbon content below the solubility limit at temperatures up to 1650°F even though subsequent carbon analyses for the alloys were in the range of 0.005% to 0.01%. Apparatus has been set up to determine the temperature range of melting for INOR-8. The purpose is twofold: to establish the melting range of the alloy more accurately, and to compare the melting range of the various heats of the alloy with their respective nil ductility temperature as reported by Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute. The latter purpose is related to the incidence of base-metal cracking found in certain heats of INOR-8 when welded under restraint. The particular heats involved were found to exhibit inferior ductility behavior at high temperatures, therefore, a comparison of the nil-ductility temperature with the solidus temperature might establish whether the presence of liquid was the cause of the poor elevated-temperature ductility. Differences in the solidus temperatures between various heats of the alloy could be related to varying amounts of trace impurities in the material. Although no definite conclusions are yet possible, it does appear that solidus temperatures are somewhat higher than nil-ductility temperatures, raising some doubt about whether liquid phases are the cause of the elevated-temperature brittleness reported. The specific heat of annealed INOR-8 has been determined by direct calorimetric measurements at the University of Tennessee. The value was observed to increase uniformly from 0.409 joules per gram °C at 60°C to 0.483 joules per gram, degress Celsius at 540°C. At 550°C, an anomalous rise of about 20% in the specific heat was observed, reaching a maximum value of 0.586 joules per gram, degrees Celsius at 610°C. Above this temperature, the specific heat decreased to 0.578 joules per gram, °C at 700°C. The phenomenon has been attributed to an ordering reaction. The temperature dependence of the total hemispherical emittance of platinum, matte and bright-finished INOR-8, and several oxidized INOR-8 specimens was measured between 100 and 700°C. The method employed an instrumented thin-strip specimen heated electrically in a black-body vacuum chamber which was held at a constant known temperature. Heat gains or losses considered in obtaining this equation are the electrical power dissipated by the specimen, the radiant energy incident upon the specimen, and the radiant energy emitted by the specimen. Heat gains or losses which are neglected as being cumulatively less than 4% are radiant energy emitted by the specimen that is reflected by the chamber walls back to the specimen surfaces, the heat loss by atmospheric convection and conduction, the heat loss by conduction through the specimen to the input electrodes, and the heat loss by conduction through the thermocouple leads. The total hemispherical emittance of platinum measured by this method serves as a guide to the validity of the measurements on the INOR-8 specimens. The platinum data compare quite favorably with other literature values. The authors' data for platinum are approximately 16% higher than data obtained by a similar method at 500°C. A large part of this percentage difference is because the platinum tested did not have a bright polish. The data from three of the INOR-8 specimens reflects the importance of surface finish. Runs 6 and 12 were on different specimens having a bright polish, and the results are remarkably close. Run 1 was on a matte-finish INOR-8 and is 7.1% higher than runs 6 and 12 at 500°C. Following the initial runs, the matte-finished and bright-polished specimens were treated. These treatments resulted in an increase in the total hemispherical emittance which was insensitive to thermal cycling effects. The increase in total hemispherical emittance was greatest for the 1000°C treatment and least for the 730°C treatments. Based on these measurements, if INOR-8 is given an oxidizing heat treatment at 1000°C, its total hemispherical emittance at 600°C will be 0.76 as compared to an untreated surface, respectively, are to be expected. Oxidation at temperatures below 1000°C will not yield as high a total hemispherical emittance. A program is under way to investigate and circumvent weld-cracking which has been observed in some heats of INOR-8 material. Cracking and microfissuring have been reported in test welds made with certain base-metal and filler-metal heats. Since the melting practice used by the material supplier in pouring the initial ingots appeared to influence the cracking behavior markedly, the major effort has been directed at investigation of this variable. Since different vendors use their own melting practices or practices, quantities of l inch-thick material were obtained from three vendors. In some cases, the vendor furnished individual heats of material melted according to different proprietary practices. Test welds were then made with these materials under conditions of high restraint and were then carefully examined for cracking by visual, dye-penetrant, and metallographic inspection. Mechanical tests on these welds were conducted at room and elevated temperatures, and, in addition, hot-ductility testing is being performed and evaluated on a subcontract at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute. Complete chemical analyses on all heats used in the study are being obtained in an attempt to correlate composition and melting practice with performance. A discussion of the different phases of the study, together with the results to date, is presented in the following paragraphs. An extensive metallographic examination was performed on 14 weld-test plates fabricated from nine different heats of INOR-8 base metal from three different vendors. When available, the filler wire used was of the same heat of INOR-8 as the base plate. However, in several cases, filler wire of the desired heat was not available, and another heat was used in the interest of expediency. Transverse tensile and creep tests were performed on welds of seven of the heats included in the program. From the testing conducted thus far, it appears that the vacuum-melted heat, and the air-melted heat, exhibit the best overall weldability. The air-melted heat did not exhibit any cracking or porosity, but the creep and tensile properties were generally somewhat lower. Note that the cracking and porosity seen in the metallographic examination are generally reflected in the transverse tensile tests by markedly reduced ductilities and by slightly lower tensile strengths. The good tensile properties of the weld in one of the materials are attributed to the fact that the filler wire possessed excellent weldability. In the creep tests, the weld porosity and microfissuring were reflected in short rupture times. In most cases, lowered ductilities were also observed. Note however that the weld in SP-26 material responded rather poorly in the creep test, indicating that this test is really a more selective criterion for true joint integrity. The qualification tests for tungsten-arc welding of INOR-8 to stainless steel and Inconel have been completed. Based on the findings of the weldability study performed on INOR-8, the existing specification for the welding of INOR-8 alloy pipe, plate, and fittings is being revised. The revisions will incorporate into the welding procedure the requirement that the interpass temperature does not exceed 200°F. Experience with this type of material indicated that interpass-temperature control was desirable to ensure high joint integrity when welding this material in thick sections under high restraint. If removal of any molten salt reactor experiment primary components is required, provisions must be made for remotely disconnecting and subsequently rejoining the necessary pipework. For this reason, a study is being conducted in cooperation with the Reactor Division Remote Maintenance Group to develop procedures for constructing these remotely brazed joints. The design of such a joint is influenced by both brazing and remotemaintenance requirements. Maintenance procedures are simplified by use of relatively loose fits and a minimum of remote machining, but optimum brazing procedures require relatively tight fits and very clean surfaces. Accordingly, a tentative joint design was adopted. The major features of this joint are the provisions for brazing alloy pre-placement and a radial clearance of 2 and 1/2 to 3 and 1/2 thousandths of an inch. This clearance is considered optimum in terms of ease of fitup and reliable brazing-alloy flowability. Preliminary work with the brazing of INOR-8 led to the selection of a brazing alloy composed of 82 weight % gold and 18 weght % nickel. The alloy is ductile and very resistant to both molten fluoride-salt corrosion and high-temperature oxidation. Miller-Peaslee shear-test specimens of INOR-8 brazed with this alloy exhibit good shear strengths at molten salt reactor experiment-operating temperatures. Joints were brazed in the flat position in both inert and dry-hydrogen atmospheres with gaps ranging from contact to 10 thousandths of an inch. Testing at 1300°F in air showed the joints to have a minimum shear strength of 12,500 pounds per square inch and an average of 18,100 pounds per square inch. The joints brazed in helium exhibited slightly higher strengths than did equivalent hydrogen-brazed joints, and attempts are being made to determine the reason. Additional shear-test specimens have been brazed and will be tested to provide room-temperature shear-strength data as well as data on specimens aged at 1300 degrees Farenheit for 1000 and 10,000 hours. Long-time diffusion studies of INOR-8 lap joints brazed with the gold-nickel alloy have also been conducted. Specimens were aged from 1000 to 10,000 hours at both 1200°F and 1500°F in air. The maximum amount of diffusion of brazing alloy into the base metal, as detected by microhardness measurements was only about 2 thousandths of an inch at 1200°F and 7 thousandths of an inch at 1500°F. This minor amount of diffusion is expected to have little effect on joint strength and over-all base-metal properties. To date, four joints have been brazed in the laboratory to determine the quality of joint. Ultrasonic inspection of the joints indicated a few unbonded areas ranging from very small scattered voids to occasional regions up to one-fourth the length of the joint. This joint was greatly overdesigned to accommodate occasional defects and, no doubt, would be adequate in a molten-salt system. Nevertheless, a slightly tapered joint design is being investigated it is expected to eliminate nearly all nonbonded areas and to make remote assembly somewhat easier. A program has been started to determine the strain-fatigue behavior of INOR-8, and four tests, two at 1300 and two at 1500°F, were performed on rod specimens of heat SP-25. Further strain-fatigue tests, both mechanical and thermal, on tubular specimens from the same heat of material are in progress. A number of tensile tests have been performed on specimens subjected to creep loading for various times. No detrimental effects of prior creep were observed in the tensile properties. Creep tests on a weak, low-ductility heat material, M-1566, indicate that soaking at 1600 and 1800°F for 2 hours increased the rupture life and ductility. The use of unclad graphite in the molten-salt reactor requires that a minimum of the graphite pore space be filled with salt. A test program is in progress to study the impregnation of different grades and sizes of graphite by a lithium fluoride salt containing both thorium tetrafluoride and uranium tetrafluoride at 1300 degrees Fahrenheit for various times and pressures. Three additional grades of graphites failed to meet the low salt-impregnation requirements in the standard screening test, which was conducted for 100 hours under a salt pressure of 150 pounds per square inch gauge pressure. However, the tests indicated that increasing the as-fabricated diameter of a rod of graphite or fabricating it in the shape of a pipe made it more open to the molten salt. Grades GB and GP were extruded and impregnated types of graphite. Grade B-1-B was the base stock for a low-permeability graphite, grade B-1. Most of the rod-shaped graphite was fabricated with relatively large diameters. Tests were run to determine the effects of temperature on removing oxygen and oxide contamination from graphite by the thermal decomposition products of ammonium bifluoride. Purging temperatures varied from 1300 to 930°F, but times were held constant at 20 hours. INOR-8 specimens were also included in these test runs to observe the effect of the decomposition products on this alloy. The lithium fluoride uranium tetrafluoride salt is a sensitive oxygen detector and in the presence of oxygen at 1300°F readily precipitates part of its uranium as uranium dioxide. This reaction is easily detected using radiography. Therefore, to determine the effectiveness of the purging of graphite crucibles with the thermal decomposition product of ammonium bifluoride, the purged crucibles were charged with the lithium fluoride uranium tetrafluoride salt and heated to 1300°F. At intervals of time the crucibles containing the salt were radiographically monitored for a uranium dioxide precipitate. Results indicated that purging at temperatures of 930, 1110, and 1300 degrees Farenheit was equally effective in removing oxygen from AGOT and R-0025 graphites. All the purged graphite crucibles contained the lithium fluoride uranium tetrafluoride salt at 1300°F for more than 2000 hours without uranium dioxide being detected. There has been no indication, at this time, that the different porosities of AGOT and R-0025 graphites affected the purging action. It is expected that porosity might be a factor in a more impermeable grade of graphite. To secure additional data on the reaction of the thermal decomposition products of ammonium bifluoride with INOR-8, 40 thousandths of an inch thick sheet-type tensile specimens were included in the purging test using grade R-0025 graphite. A layer was formed on the INOR-8 at all purging temperatures. This layer is peing identified. The thickest of the reaction layers apparently did not seriously harm the tensile properties of the INOR-8. 100 hour accelerated corrosion tests at 1832 degrees Farenheit in the lithium fluoride thorium tetrafluoride uranium tetrafluoride salt were made on control and exposed specimens from the 1300°F purge to determine the effects of this layer. The reaction layer was removed by the salt but there was no difference in corrosion attack between the control specimens and those with reaction layers. More detailed studies will be made to determine the effect of the reaction layer on INOR-8 corrosion resistance to molten fluorides. A molten-salt-fuel capsule irradiation experiment has been operated at the Materials Test Reactor and is now undergoing postirradiation examination. The experiment was designed to determine the effect of irradiation on graphite at or in excess of molten salt reactor experiment temperatures and heating conditions, the wetting characteristics of the fuel with graphite at high temperature, and the compatibility of the principal molten salt reactor experiment structural materials with the molten salt. The experiment contained four capsules with fuel in graphite boats as described previously. The graphite and fuel were encapsulated in cans of INOR-8 which were immersed in molten sodium for convenience in heat removal and temperature measurement. Two capsules contained AGOT graphite impregnated prior to irradiation with fuel salt, and two contained R-0025 graphite, unimpregnated. Also, included in each capsule were specimens of molybdenum, pyrolytic carbon, and INOR-8 in contact with the fuel. The overall time-averaged temperatures of the graphite-to-salt interfaces were about 790 degrees Celsius for the capsules with unimpregnated R-0025 graphite and 810 and 900 degrees Celsius for the capsules with impregnated AGOT graphite. The difference between the temperatures of the two impregnated capsules corresponds to the differences between the local ambient temperatures in the sodium. These temperatures conservatively are above the design temperature of 1300°F proposed for the molten salt reactor experiment reactor. They are, however, below the proposed temperature for the capsules. This is attributable largely to the fact that the impregnated graphite contained only 9 grams of fuel instead of the 17 grams assumed in the design. It also is probable that the changes made in the MTR core, namely, the removal of ANP experiments and the relocation of control rods, reduced the thermal neutron flux at the HB-3 beam hole and also contributed to the lower temperatures. The steady-state temperatures of the capsules were constant within 10°C. The accumulated time during non-steady state operation includes only the transient times for temperature changes of 30°C or more. The experiment was removed from the MTR, partially disassembled, and is now at Battelle Memorial Institute, where further dismantling and postirradiation examination will be conducted. As an aid to the interpretation of the irradiation experiments, out-of-pile experiments have been initiated by the Reactor Chemistry Division to duplicate the temperature history, including transients, on control sample capsules. During the past four years, the phase relationships for one after another of priority because of their direct bearing on fuel, blanket, and coolant materials for the molten salt reactor experiment have been summarized previously. For comparison, and because of the possibility that sodium fluoride-based materials will be useful in the future, a parallel investigation of the phase relationships in the binary and ternary systems limiting the quaternary system sodium fluoride thorium tetrafluoride and uranium tetrafluoride has been pursued. Diagrams of these limiting systems have been reported as they were completed, and the last one is described below. Before brief studies have been made for evaluating the usefulness of sodium fluoride-beryllium fluoride and lithium fluoride-beryllium fluoride mixtures as solvents for zirconium alloy fuel elements in the fluoride volatility process. The principal difference between the systems sodium fluoride, thorium tetrafluoride, and uranium tetrafluoride, on one hand, and lithium fluoride, thorium tetrafluoride, and uranium tetrafluoride, on the other hand, is that in the former system limited solid solutions are the rule, while in the latter system they are the exception. Solubility of a small amount of either thorium tetrafluoride or uranium fluoride in sodium fluoride-thorium tetrafluoride-uranium tetrafluoride solid-solution phases containing a larger amount of the other tetrafluoride is practically complete. Solid-phase segregation in mixtures containing nearly equal amounts of thorium tetrafluoride and uranium tetrafluoride yields solid solutions moderately richer in one of the tetrafluorides, though in such processes the residual liquids do not become appreciably more concentrated in either thorium tetrafluoride or uranium tetrafluoride than the original composition. Low-melting nonvolatile fluorides such as tin(II) fluoride and lead(II) fluoride have sometimes been proposed as possible additives to lower the melting point of fuels. Unfortunately, they are too corrosive to contain in anything except graphite and possibly molybdenum. For concentrations of uranium tetrafluoride or thorium tetrafluoride over 10 mole %, the use of lithium fluoride-beryllium fluoride as a solvent gives a lower melting mixture than found for the lead(II) fluoride-quadrivalent fluoride binary even though pure tin(II) fluoride melts at only 213 degrees Celsius. Much effort has been devoted over a period of years to locating the lowest melting regions in phase diagrams of salts suitable for use in nuclear reactors. But in practice, the lowest-melting compositions, which characteristically solidify without change in composition of the liquid during the freezing process, are rarely suitable for reactor use somewhat altered compositions which retain the desirable feature of a relatively low melting point are used. As a consequence, fuels of practical interest are prone to segregate on freezing. In phase-study terminology an important aspect of the segregation behavior is referred to as the crystallization path of the fuel. Complex mixtures such as the molten salt reactor experiment fuel can follow numerous crystallization paths depending on the conditions of freezing. Slow cooling, which favors the equilibrium crystallization path, can greatly enhance segregation into strata of different crystalline compounds. A fast rate of cooling, besides giving rise to some different erystalline compounds and to altered proportions of those that form in any case, can often virtually eliminate stratification. Freeze valves, which are frozen plugs in salt lines to stop flow or to allow flow on thawing, have given generally satisfactory results in engineering tests. The presence of a frozen zone does, however, provide an opportunity for segregation and for the cold trapping of high melting or insoluble precipitates. Consequently attention has been paid to gaining a better understanding of the crystallization path of the fuel during freeze valve operation. The following sequence of events was surmised to have occurred during freezing. The primary and secondary phases began to precipitate on the coolest metal and formed a layer which grew inward and upward, finally forming a complete arch or dome which stopped the flow. Further growth of this layer depleted the zirconium tetrafluoride content of the overlying stagnant melt, and as the temperature fell to the point that all the liquid in the frozen zone solidified, the last liquid to freeze, found as a mixture of crystals too fine to be readily identifiable, was enriched in uranium tetrafluoride. In this portion, depleted in zirconium tetrafluoride and enriched in uranium tetrafluoride, some uranium dioxide was found. Evidently the fuel originally contained a small amount of oxide which was held in solution by complexing with the zirconium ion, but which formed a precipitate of uranium dioxide when the zirconium tetrafluoride-rich phases were frozen out. Several days after the frozen plug had formed, finely divided beryllium oxide was added to the still-molten fuel in the upper tank for the purpose of forming zirconium dioxide. In order to check on the extent of cold trapping of zirconium dioxide in the cold zone in the vicinity of the frozen plug, a precipitate of zirconium dioxide formed, as expected, but it appeared to have accumulated predominantly on the walls in the upper parts of the system, rather than growing preferentially in the cold zone of the freeze valve. Had the system been allowed to age for a long time, presumably more zirconium dioxide would have been cold trapped, but under the conditions of this experiment no indications of a plug of zirconium dioxide in the cold zone were found. The main conclusion reached was that segregation in a stagnant fuel can cause localized depletion of zirconium tetrafluoride, resulting in the precipitation of small amounts of uranium dioxide. A contrasting and more typical case of zirconium dioxide precipitation without the formation of uranium dioxide was afforded by a melt which became contaminated with oxide from insufficiently pure helium used as a protective atmosphere. In this case, zirconium dioxide accumulated in a layer at the bottom of the melt, and no uranium dioxide was found. Crystals of zirconium dioxide that grow in the molten salt reactor experiment fuel at 600 to 700°C are usually 20 to 30 micrometers in size, while those which are formed during freezing, by precipitation of soluble oxide, are only 1 or 2 micrometers in maximum diameter. The formation of a frozen zone, if carried out slowly enough, would produce a plug of the primary phase throughout the region maintained below the liquidus temperature. In actual practice, the zone is formed quickly enough that a mixture of phases is deposited, and no extensive region of segregated high-melting crystals occurs. In the temperature gradient leading away from the coldest portion, however, there will be a contour corresponding to the liquidus temperature of the molten salt reactor experiment fuel. Here there should be a crust of the primary phase. Fortunately, this crust has apparently always been thin enough to dissolve rapidly on raising the temperature, and sluggish responses attributable to high-melting phases, even in other compositions, have not been noted. When an attempt was made to use oxide analyses in the 100 to 1000 part per million range on a routine basis in several extensive experiments on fuels, a greater-than-expected variance in the oxide content among replicate samples was encountered. The analysis of trace amounts of oxides has long been recognized as exceedingly difficult, but a method based on a fluorination procedure had shown considerable promise. In view, however, of the frequent occurrence of apparently irreconcilable results, a statistical survey was carried out in a search for clues to the source of the difficulty. Analyses of 75 replicate samples from a single composite source or standard mixture were accumulated for statistical treatment to determine the differences attributable to two different but supposedly identical assemblies, each involving three fluorination cells as employed by two different operators. Temporal factors were also included as a parameter. A mean value of 500 parts per million oxide was obtained, and 56 of the 75 analyses were distributed between 300 and 750 parts per million. No significant source of variance was attributable to any of the nonprocedural factors which were tested. With this point established, attention is currently being turned to procedural problems. When an attempt was made to calibrate the analytical method on triuranium octoxide, which provides a relatively large oxygen content, good results were obtained. The results for eighteen samples ranged from 14.0% to 15.6% oxide with an average of 15.1%, whereas the theoretical content was 15.18%. The effect of using larger samples of salt will be studied next, even though there are disadvantages associated with the use of large samples. Also, the influence of particle size, which may affect both sampling and the completeness of the reaction, is to be investigated in experiments making use of a factorial design and sequential analysis. Consideration is being given to the feasibility of an alternative method based on the isotopic dilution of oxygen 18 introduced for equilibration as water containing oxygen 18 in vapor phase in a cover gas containing hydrogen fluoride. Apparatus has been designed, major components constructed, assembly nearly completed for measurement of surface tension of fused fluoride mixtures by bubble pressure method. Surface tensions measured for few fluoride mixtures expected to throw light on changes in structure and bonding with composition changes in molten salt mixtures. Surface tension breeder fuels also important factor determining wetting or permeation graphite fuel, matter of considerable interest molten salt reactor experiment. Recently constructed apparatus search for strongly surface active additives pure fluorides lithium fluoride beryllium fluoride based melts known literature on molten salts. In conjunction work on permeation graphite, surface tension results permit estimation individual contributions surface tension contact angle effects. The bubble pressure method was chosen for the surface tension measurements because it is generally accepted to be the most accurate and most generally applicable method for molten salts. Since many fluorides are sensitive to moisture and air, the bubble tube and crucible of salt were enclosed in a gastight flanged nickel reactor which can be evacuated and filled with a thoroughly dried inert atmosphere. Provision was made for checking the water content of the inert gas blanket and the bubble gas with a Meeco electrolytic water analyzer. Other principal innovations include the use of a special controllable leak valve for regulating the bubble flow, and the use of a cistern-type dibutyl phthalate manometer constructed from precision-bore tubing in both arms. The procedure and apparatus for making each measurement needed for the surface tension determination were designed to yield results as accurate as any in the literature of molten salts. Consideration of proposed experiments to determine the extent of liberation of fission product iodine from the Molten Salt Reactor Experiment (MSRE) fuel has led to a review of the factors controlling the release. As predicted previously, elemental iodine is not expected in the molten salt reactor experiment off-gas in appreciable amounts because of the reducing action of chromium in the INOR-8 used to contain the fuel. The detailed mechanism involves the agency of a small concentration of uranium trifluoride in equilibrium with the chromium and uranium tetrafluoride. The vapor pressure of iodide salts from the fuel is expected to be below 10 to the -6 millimeters of mercury at reactor temperature. In case of a spill involving contact of the salt with air or water there will be some release of iodine activity. Oxygen in air can displace iodide ions in the fuel to produce elemental iodine, and water hydrolyzes iodide salts to give volatile hydrogen iodide, which also reacts with oxygen. Both direct oxidation and hydrolysis come to virtual cessation as soon as the fuel freezes, but it is difficult to predict the extent of reaction prior to solidification. Assuming that the spill is quenched by flooding with water, hydrolysis to produce hydrogen iodide might be expected to proceed at roughly the same rate per ion of halide as hydrolysis to produce hydrogen fluoride. Hence if less than 10% of the fluoride leaves as hydrogen fluoride, which should cover most cases, then a release of 10% or less of the iodine content could be predicted. In the molten salt reactor experiment some of the xenon produced by fission is expected to diffuse into the graphite moderator and there be converted into cesium by decay or by neutron capture. Cesium is known to intercalate with graphite. Changes produced in the graphite surface by the cesium might conceivably change the wetting behavior. To evaluate this, graphite treated with cesium, along with untreated specimens as controls were immersed in molten salt and compared. Three graphite (AGOT) cylinders, 12770 micrometers in diameter and 25300 micrometers long, weighing 5 and 4 tenths grams each, were outgassed at 200°C by pumping a vacuum for 3-1/4 hours, and then treated with 26 and one half liters of helium saturated with cesium at 200°C. According to the vapor pressure data of Kubaschewski and Evans, about 32 thousands of a gram of cesium was exposed to the graphite. This is about 1 and a quarter gram of cesium per 1000 square centimeters of graphite. These treated specimens, and three similar graphite specimens that had merely been outgassed, were kept immersed in molten molten salt reactor experiment fuel at 650°C for 41 hours. No wetting appeared to have occurred and none of the specimens was changed in appearance by the experiment. Those without the cesium treatment lost 2 thousandths of a gram each, probably due to outgassing. The specimen nearest the cesium inlet gained 12 thousandths of a gram. The other treated specimens lost 1 thousandth of a gram each. It was concluded that the exposure to cesium vapor obtained in this experiment was too mild to alter the graphite detectably. Continued improvements in processing methods have been made at the facility for the production of purified fluoride mixtures. Current procedures for fluoride mixtures that melt below 800°C use flowing hydrogen and anhydrous hydrogen fluoride to achieve purification with a minimum of corrosion in the equipment. During the period covered by this report, approximately 885 kg of mixtures comprised of processed for the Chemical Technology Division. The current production rate for purifying molten fluorides is approximately 1.3 cubic feet per week for each of two units. This value is derived from a single shift operation during a normal five-day week. However, by employing a multishift operation and a seven-day week, this production rate can probably be increased to approximately 1.9 cubic feet per week for each unit. The anticipated operation of the molten salt reactor experiment will require the preparation of approximately 155 cubic feet of fluoride mixtures for the flush, fuel, and coolant media of the reactor. From considerations of methods for transporting these purified fluoride mixtures to the reactor, the use of some of about 50 existing cans, now in storage and filled with sodium fluoride zirconium tetrafluoride uranium tetrafluoride melts, appears feasible. To be suitable, these containers should be reconditioned to remove residual salts from previous usage. However, the costs incurred by this operation can be partially offset by incorporating a modification to these vessels which will increase their capacity. By lengthening each shipping container by approximately 12 inches, the full capacity of the purification treatment vessels can be utilized. This modification would effectively increase the maximum weekly production rate of fluoride mixtures to approximately 3 and a half feet for each of two operational units. With these proposed alterations, the fluoride mixtures required by the molten salt reactor experiment could be processed during a minimum operating time of approximately six months. Eight months of lead time should allow for contingencies and unforeseen difficulties. The evaluation of the proposed amperometric method for the determination of thorium in the molten salt reactor experiment fuel mixture has been completed. This method is particularly applicable to remote operations with radioactive fuel mixtures. An indirect method has been developed for estimating the zirconium content of fuels. It is based on a method involving the determination of total thorium and zirconium. In this method, an excess of ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid is added to an aliquot of the solution containing both thorium and zirconium. After the addition of sodium fluoride, the acidity of the solution is adjusted to pH 4 with sodium acetate, and the excess A is back-titrated with a solution of vanadyl sulfate. The equivalence point of the titration is detected amperometrically with a platinum electrode at an applied potential of 0.6 volts. At this potential, the addition of excess vanadyl sulfate results in an increased rate of current flow. Calculations based on this titration yield the sum of thorium and zirconium. Since the thorium content is determined independently, as mentioned above, the zirconium content can be estimated by difference. The equipment proposed for use in determining oxygen concentrations in highly radioactive fuel was assembled and preliminary testing began. However, due to the limited number of tests conducted, it is difficult to evaluate the equipment at this time. Tests that have been described previously, 16 were carried out to determine the effectiveness of titanium sponge as a getter for the removal of oxygen and nitrogen from helium, the molten salt reactor experiment cover gas. Preheated helium that was contaminated with oxygen and nitrogen at levels from 1 hundredth of a percent to 2% was passed over beds  of titanium metal sponge in a heated quartz tube. In these tests, the flow rates were varied from about 100 cubic centimeters per minute to 4 liters per minute, and the temperature of the titanium was varied from 600 to 1200°F. In order to increase the sensitivity of the chromatographic method for the determination of oxygen and nitrogen in helium, a method was devised in which these contaminants are concentrated from a 1/2-liter sample of the gas onto a bed of molecular sieves at the temperature of liquid nitrogen. In this method, the exit gas, from the purification apparatus, flowing at a rate of 100 cubic centimeters per minute, is passed for 5 minutes through a tube that is packed with thoroughly dried, Linde, type 5A, molecular sieves. During this operation, the trap assembly is submerged in a liquid-nitrogen bath. At the end of the 5-minute period, the molecular-sieve trap is inserted into a stream of specially purified, helium carrier gas by means of a six-way valve, after which the liquid-nitrogen bath is removed and replaced with warm water. The oxygen and nitrogen which are trapped quantitatively from the sample are released immediately thereby and then routed through a molecular sieve colum in a Greenbrier mode1-950 chromatograph. The concentrations of the resolved gases in the eluate from the chromatographic colum are determined in the conventional manner by comparing the thermal conductivity of the eluate with that of the pure carrier-gas stream. Calibrations were performed by carrying out the same operations on a sample of the inlet gas to the purification train. The fraction of a contaminant passing through the purification train is thus given by the ratio of the area of a contaminant peak in the exit-gas chromatogram to the area of the corresponding peak in the inlet-gas chromatogram. Concentrations of nitrogen as low as 1 tenth of a part per million can be measured easily by this method. The sensitivity can obviously be increased by trapping the contaminants for periods longer than 5 minutes. On the basis of repeated calibration experiments, it has been found that the precision of such measurements is about 3% for concentrations of the order of 100 part per million. The sensitivity of the method for the determination of oxygen actually exceeds that for the determination of nitrogen; however, the measurement of oxygen is complicated by the presence of argon, which accompanies the oxygen when separations are performed on columns of molecular sieves at room temperature. Since the oxygen from contaminated helium samples has been prepared contains almost 1% of argon, the exact measurement of oxygen becomes uncertain when more than 99% of the oxygen is removed by the purification process. At present, the measurements of oxygen are corrected by subtracting the contribution of argon on the measured oxygen-argon peak. This method is not, however, completely satisfactory since under some conditions only a few tenths of a percent of the original oxygen escapes capture in the titanium purifier. Future experiments will be carried out with contaminated helium samples prepared from argon-free oxygen; the oxygen will be generated by the thermal decomposition of lead dioxide. The solid-liquid transition was not sharply defined and extended over the broad span of 360 to 480°C. There are suggestions of two-phase transformations in this region. The heat of fusion, evaluated between 360 and 480°C, was 151.4 calories per gram. The mean value of the heat capacity of the liquid between 550 and 600°C is 586 thousandths calories per gram degree Celsius. The emperical value is 0.550 calories per gram. Based on the experimental value of specific heat, the agreement is within 6.5%. The agreement between the experimental and predicted values for this heavy-metal-free composition is felt to be reasonable. In order to further clarify the heat-balance discrepancy noted in the heat-transfer studies with the lithium fluoride beryllium fluoride thorium tetrafluoride uranium fluoride salt mixture, the enthalpy of the liquid was redetermined, using a sample of circulated salt. The results show the comparison with correlating equations developed from an earlier measurement on an unexposed sample and a redetermination using this same salt. While the variation in the magnitude of the enthalpy curves for the three samples is a maximum of 3.5% around the mean value, the differences in slope and curvature are sufficient to cause a discrepancy of 10% in the heat capacities at the extremes of the temperature range. This deviation may result from composition differences in the samples. The mean value for all three samples over the range 550 to 800°C is 335 thousanths calories per gram degree Celsius. This exact agreement in the mean values suggests that the observed variations in specific heat, may lie within the experimental precision associated with these measurements. This aspect of the enthalpy program will be investigated further. Average values estimated agree within 7% with the experimental mean. Interpretation of the data obtained in the study of heat transfer with lithium fluoride beryllium fluoride uranium tetrafluoride thorium tetrafluoride salt mixture has been continued, with primary emphasis on the resolution of the abnormal heat balances observed. The experimental measurements for the flow rate, heat capacity, and fluid temperature rise must all be re-examined. The fluid-flow rate was determined by use of a turbine-type flowmeter for which the primary data were displayed as the rate of turbine rotation. This was converted to pounds per hour of salt flow, using a water-flow calibration corrected for the specific-gravity difference between water and the salt. Since experimental data on the density of the salt mixture were not available, recourse was had to an empirical correlation developed from measurements on other beryllium fluoride containing mixtures. However, there is a great deal of uncertainty as to the actual composition of the salt circulated in the loop this has a significant effect on the predicted density. For a typical run, the heat balance ratio varies from 1 and 5 hundredths to 1 and 24 hundredths between the empirically derived density value for the uncirculated salt and the stochastic estimate of the circulated-salt density, respectively. An empirical determination of the density of this salt mixture is planned. A second possible error relating to the rate of salt flow derives from a lack of information as to the influence of fluid viscosity on the output of the turbine meter. Since preliminary inquiries suggest that this may be significant, a study is in progress using liquids of various viscosities to calibrate a turbine-type flowmeter. A further uncertainty in the convective heat gain relates to the discrepancy in heat capacities as measured with circulated and uncirculated salt samples. Thus, the heat-capacity ratio is 1.60. As noted in the discussion above on the enthalpy of the salt mixture, the influence of this uncertainty in specific heat is a minimum near 1247°F. Again, further measurements on the heat capacity are indicated. A re-examination of the calibrations for the thermocouples used in obtaining the fluid mean temperatures shows that, while a systemic error exists in the electromagnetic field output, the readings from the thermocouple pairs (inlet and outlet) are sufficiently close to disallow any effect on the value of heat. The complex fluoride salts of antimony pentafluoride, with potassium fluoride, silver fluoride, and strontium fluoride were prepared by dissolving the compounds in anhydrous hydrogen fluoride and adding a small excess of antimony pentafluoride liquid. In each case a precipitate formed, showing that the complex is less soluble than the simple fluoride. The potassium fluoride antimony pentafluoride complex is soluble in anhydrous hydrogen fluoride at 20°C to 150 mg per gram of solution, or 34 milligrams of potassium fluoride per gram of solution. Qualitatively, the silver fluoride antimony pentafluoride complex is rather insoluble, probably less than 1 milligram per gram of solution, and the strontium fluoride antimony pentafluoride salt is intermediate in solubility. The compounds were purified by recrystallization from anhydrous hydrogen fluoride after two anhydrous hydrogen fluoride washes of the original precipitate. The potassium fluoride antimony pentafluoride, compound was so soluble that a rather concentrated solution was formed during evaporation of the excess hydrogen fluoride, and solids tended to form a surface film. Good single crystals were not obtained. The strontium fluoride antimony pentafluoride, compound formed crystals on the sides of the bottle, above the liquid phase. The silver fluoride antimony pentafluoride, compound formed granular brown crystals of reasonably good quality for crystal structure determination. Analyses showed that the potassium fluoride salt was potassium hexafluoroantimonate, with potassium to antimony mole ratios of 1 and 7 hundredths and 1 and 14 hundredths in two preparations and fluorine to potassium plus 5 antimony ratios of 1 and 7 hundredths and 1. Analyses for the other two salts were not entirely consistent. The silver fluoride antimony pentafluoride, compound was probably potassium hexafluoroantimonate, since the silver to antimony ratio was 1 and 10 hundredths, but the total of silver, antimony, and fluorine added up to 110%, probably because of a high fluorine determination. For the strontium fluoride antimony pentafluoride the constituents added up to only 87%. The strontium to antimony mole ratio was 71 hundredths, and the fluorine to 2 strontium and 5 antimony ratio was 1 and 1 half. The compound apparently contained considerable HF. The sodium fluoride molybdenum hexafluoride complex was prepared by mixing solutions of sodium fluoride and molybdenum hexafluoride, both in anhydrous hydrogen fluoride. There was little if any heat of reaction, and no precipitate formed. The solution was boiled to dryness, both hydrogen fluoride and molybdenum hexafluoride being evolved, and the boiling point increased slowly to about 60°C before any solids appeared. The salt was further dried by heating to about 80°C under a stream of helium. The resulting solid had an sodium to molybdenum ratio of 5 and 15 hundredths and an fluoride to sodium and 6 molybdenum ratio of 1 and 5 hundredths, in agreement within analytical error with the formula molybdenum hexafluoride 5 sodium fluorid. Later preparations were de-solvated by pumping off the excess hydrogen fluoride solvent with a vacuum pump for several hours at a little above room temperature. These samples generally had sodium to molybdenum ratios of 30 or greater, indicating that the pumping removed most of the molybdenum hexafluoride. There was an indication that the solids contained 8 tenths to 9 tenths mole of hydrogen fluoride per mole of sodium fluoride. Apparently molybdenum hexafluoride and hydrogen fluoride compete for the sodium fluoride, with hydrogen fluoride probably being complexed more strongly at these temperatures. The preparation of uranium hexafluoride complexes with lithium fluoride, sodium fluoride, and potassium fluoride was attempted in a manner similar to that for the molybdenum hexafluoride complexes. All were quite soluble in hydrogen fluoride, and the solids obtained upon evaporation of the excess hydrogen fluoride were yellow for lithium fluoride and sodium fluoride and orange for potassium fluoride. The lithium fluoride preparation had a lithium to uranium mole ratio of 14 and contained 6 tenths of a mole of hydrogen fluoride per mole of lithium fluoride. Three sodium fluoride uranium hexafluoride preparations, with successively more vigorous treatment to remove hydrogen fluoride, had sodium to uranium ratios of 10, 17, and 39, and sodium to hydrogen fluoride ratios of 1 to 2. Apparently uranium hexafluoride was removed rather than hydrogen fluoride by the de-solvation treatment. The potassium fluoride complex had a potassium to uranium mole ratio of 8 and 1 half and contained 2 moles of hydrogen fluoride per mole of potassium fluoride. Thus, all the compounds contained less uranium hexafluoride than expected, and there was some indication that uranium hexafluoride was removed by the procedures used to remove excess hydrogen fluoride solvent. It appears that hydrogen fluoride and uranium hexafluoride are complexed competitively by the alkali metal fluorides and that all the complexes contain some hydrogen fluoride. They are therefore different from the complexes formed by reaction of uranium hexafluoride gas with solid sodium fluoride. It appears, further, that the hydrogen fluoride is held more tightly than uranium hexafluoride, at least at room temperature. This suggests the possibility of separating some of the volatile fluorides by displacement, for example, by displacing uranium hexafluoride from a sodium fluoride uranium hexafluoride bed with hydrogen fluoride. This would require a knowledge of the vapor pressure of all these compounds as a function of temperature and composition. Analytical results from one experiment in which antimony pentafluoride in hydrogen fluoride was used to extract rare earths from a molten salt breeder reactor blanket salt indicate that the rare earths were not separated from the thorium tetrafluoride. The salt was first contacted twice with 95% hydrogen fluoride - 5% water to dissolve the lithium fluoride and beryllium fluoride. The remaining salt, containing the thorium tetrafluoride, uranium tetrafluoride, and rare earths, was then contacted twice with hydrogen fluorid containing 5 volume % antimony pentafluoride. This solvent dissolved very little of anything and, in particular, did not dissolve a significant portion of the rare earths. However, it should be pointed out that the analytical results were not consistent with the known composition of the salt, so a large error could be present. These results suggest that the rare earths may be present in the salt in the form of a compound, probably with lithium fluoride, which is insoluble in hydrogen fluoride and imony pentafluoride solutions, at least under the conditions of this test.