No significant changes in design concept or in detail of any component or system were made. Design work was essentially completed, and a design report giving all engineering calculations and analyses of the systems is being compiled. The remaining design work involves primarily the incorporation of results of development work into the final drawings.

Work on the major building modifications is proceeding as scheduled, and the estimated completion date is October 15, 1962. A contract was awarded for construction work required outside the building, and this work too is to be completed soon. It consists of construction of the exhaust filter house, the cooling towers, the underground piping, and the inlet filter house.

Materials procurement is on schedule except for the core graphite, whose delivery has been rescheduled to November 1, 1962. Fabrication of components is about 50% complete and on schedule.

The basic instrument criteria and control philosophy have been established. The layout of the instrument and control system has been established, and the design of control panel interconnection facilities is underway.

Designs for 30 of the 42 instrument panel sections required in the molten salt reactor experiment system are complete. Fabrication of these panels by the ORNL shops is underway.

A freeze-valve test facility has been completed and put into operation.

The selection of detectors for the process and personnel radiation monitoring system is approximately 80% complete.

Procurement of a data handling system was initiated. Specifications were prepared and procurement initiated for 80% of the components required in the process instrumentation system.

Conceivable reactivity accidents were analyzed to permit evaluation of reactor safety. Most of the calculations were done using Murgatroyd, a digital kinetics program, but some analog analyses were also used. None of the accidents analyzed led to catastrophic failure of the reactor. Unfortunately, undesirably high temperatures were predicted for circumstances associated with extreme cold-slug accidents, premature criticality during filling, and uncontrolled rod withdrawal.

Criticality and flux calculations were revised to correspond to the latest fuel composition and the detailed design of the core. Calculations were done for a core model consisting of 19 regions with different volume fractions of fuel, graphite, and INOR-8. The clean critical concentration for the reactor fueled with salt containing no thorium was calculated to be 0.15 mole % uranium that was 93% uranium 235.

High-energy fluxes were also calculated. At a reactor power of 10 megawatts, the maximum flux was about 1.3 times 10^13 neutrons per centimeter squared per second for neutrons having energies greater than 1 mega-electronvolts. For neutrons having energies greater than 0.1 mega-electronvolts, the maximum flux was about 3.7 times 10^13 neutrons per centimeter squared per second.

Fluxes and power densities from the Equipoise calculations were used, together with the detailed flow distribution in the molten salt reactor experiment core, to predict the gross temperature distributions in the fuel and graphite. At 10 megawatts, with fuel entering the core at 1175°F, fuel in the hottest channels left the reactor at 1261°F. Under the same conditions the peak graphite temperature was 1296°F. A low-temperature region existed through the center of the core where the fuel velocity was above average.

The nuclear average temperature, defined as that uniform temperature which results in the same reactivity as the actual distribution, was calculated for the fuel and for the graphite. Perturbation theory was employed, using coefficients from the Equipoise calculations. At 10 Megawatts, with the fuel inlet at 1175°F and the mixed-fuel outlet temperature at 1225°F, the nuclear average temperatures for the fuel and graphite were 1213 and 1257 degrees Fahrenheit, respectively.

Importance-averaged temperature coefficients of reactivity were calculated for the case of fuel containing no thorium. The results were -4.45 times 10 to the power of -5 and -7.27 time the power of -5 reactivity per degree Fahrenheit for the fuel and the graphite, respectively.

Power coefficients of reactivity were calculated from the nuclear average temperatures and reactivity coefficients. This quantity, defined as the reactivity adjustment required as the power is raised, depends upon which temperature is used as the control parameter. If the mean of the fuel inlet and outlet temperatures were held constant, the power coefficient of reactivity would be -4.7 times 10 to the power of -4 reactivity per megawatt. If the fuel outlet temperature were held constant, the power coefficient would be only -1.9 times 10 to the power of -4 reactivity per megawatt.

Effective delayed-neutron fractions were calculated, taking into account the delayed-neutron energies and the spatial source distributions in a one-region model of the core. For a total yield of 64 thousandths delayed neutrons per fission neutron, the effective fraction in the static core was 67 thousandths. With fuel circulating at 1200 gallons per minute, the effective steady-state fraction was 36 thousandths.

Preliminary tests were made of a new IBM-7090 program for the analysis of simulated power transients, based on a simplified space-dependent kinetics model. This program calculates fuel and graphite temperature distributions during transients and uses the nuclear-average-temperature concept to relate temperature changes to reactivity.

Measurements were made on INOR-8 freeze flanges for 5 inch diameter schedule 40 pipe under several different steady-state and transient conditions with both an octagonal and an oval nickel ring gasket. The following conclusions were drawn from these measurements: the flange joint design appears to be satisfactory from an accumulated thermal stress standpoint after 43 cycles from room temperature to 1300°F and higher; the thermal distortion of the flanges is small in the operating range and is not of a nature to cause the flanges to separate at the seal; thermal cycling does not cause the gas leakage rate to increase above an acceptable level; the flange joint will not form a frozen plug in the pipe under no-flow conditions if the pipe heaters are kept on; and the INoR-8 flanges are superior to those of the Inconel flanges tested previously, with thermal cycling of one flange not affecting its ability to seal with a new flange.

A full-scale conceptual model of the control rod and drive unit was assembled and tested under operating conditions for over 24,000 cycles. Difficulty with a bushing was solved by replacement with ball bearings. Overall operation was satisfactory.

Evaluation of a removable 5 inch pipe heater insulated with hardboard and mineral wool indicated excellent performance except for the tendency to produce dust after high-temperature operation. Nuclear activation analyses of insulating materials indicated that the dust would present a problem of air-borne activity during maintenance. Another unit, constructed of foamed fused-silica, was better with respect to dusting but had an excessive heat loss. An improved fused-silica pipe heater, incorporating some canned hardboard is being fabricated. An all-metal reflective type of unit was procured for evaluation.

The prototype cooling bayonets for removing fuel afterheat from the drain tanks were thermally shock tested 384 times without failure. Reactor-grade thermocouples were still intact after 6 cycles, whereas other types of thermocouples failed in fewer cycles.

Detail drawings of essentially all the components and instrumentation of the sampling and enriching system were finished, and construction of a mockup was started. The sampling-capsule access-chamber mockup passed the hydrostatic test requirements, and hot cell removal of a sample from the capsule was demonstrated.

The full-scale molten salt reactor experiment core model was operated at 85°F with water to make preliminary measurements of the velocity distribution, heat transfer coefficients, and solids-handling characteristics. The velocity distribution in the lower core wall-cooling annulus was found to be uniform around the circumference, indicating that the flow into the lower head was also uniform. The heat transfer coefficients in the lower head agreed with the predicted values, except near the axis, where the measurements were irregular because of the random flow. Preliminary measurements of the solids distribution in the lower head indicated that solids which do remain in the core tend to collect near the drain line at the center. It appeared, however, that they would not plug the drain line.

The engineering test loop was revised to include a graphite container and INOR-8 pipe and was placed in operation with a newly made zirconium-free coolant salt. Information was obtained on the operating characteristics of the frozen seal in the graphite container. It was found that a salt mist existed in the pump-bowl gas space that led to some difficulties with frozen salt deposits, but no such mist was found in the drain-tank gas space. After 1500 hours of operation with the empty container, graphite was installed, vacuum pretreated at 1200°F, and prepared for flushing with salt that had been treated with HF to lower its oxide content.

Design and construction of equipment for opening and closing freeze-flange joints has been completed, and procedure testing has begun. A periscope was purchased for use with this equipment. The design of a portable shield facility for semidirect maintenance operations is 60% complete. It is a motorized unit with the appropriate openings and lighting for specific operations.

Six prototype brazed joints were fabricated for quality evaluation using the equipment and general techniques required for remote operation. A similar joint was removed from a loop after 6780 hours at 1250 degrees Fahrenheit and exposure to fuel salt for 123 hours for metallurgical examination.

The design of the overflow line disconnect for the fuel pump was completed, and a carbon steel prototype was built and successfully rough tested as a demonstration of the concept. An INOR-8 model was constructed for final testing.

The design drawings for the coolant pump, the drive motors of the fuel and coolant pumps, and the lubrication stands were approved. The assembly of the rotary element and the fabrication and assembly of the hot test stand for the prototype fuel pump were completed and testing was started. Acceptable INOR-8 castings of impellers and volutes for the fuel and coolant pumps and dished heads for the pump tanks were obtained. Fabrication of all components required for the reactor pumps was initiated.

A prototype model of the two-level conductivity-type liquid-level probe being developed for use in measurement of level in the Molten Salt Reactor Experiment (MSRE) storage tanks has been constructed and is being tested.

Developmental testing of an element for continuous measurements of the molten-salt level in the reactor pumps continued. The maximum variation recorded during a four-month test was 0.1 inch, and there has been no significant degradation in performance characteristics to date.

Investigation of single-channel thermocouple alarm switches for use in freeze-flange and freeze-valve monitoring continues. A commercial system is undergoing field testing.

Development of the mercury-jet-commutator thermocouple-scanning system is continuing. Modifications of the switch were made to reduce spurious noise generation. An alarm discriminator was designed and constructed. A complete system was assembled and tested.

Testing of mechanical attachments for use on radiator tubes in the molten salt reactor experiment resumed after modifying the test apparatus. The differential between indicated inner and outer wall temperatures under simulated operating conditions was reduced to 9°F when the thermocouple was insulated with Fiberfrax paper and Thermom cement was applied between the thermocouple and the tube wall.

Six Inconel-sheathed magnesium oxide insulated Chromel-Alumel thermocouples are being tested in 1200 to 1250°F air. The observed drift in all units after 5000 hours of operation was less than 2 degrees Fahrenheit.

Ten molten salt reactor experiment-prototype wall-mounted thermocouples were exposed to fast temperature transients on the drain-tank bayonet-cooler testing facility. One thermocouple failed immediately. The remaining nine units have withstood repeated rapid temperature changes.

Results of tests of thermocouples installed on an  molten salt reactor experiment-prototype freeze valve indicate that either 1/8 inch outer diameter duplex or 1/16 inch outer diameter single-conductor thermocouples will measure wall temperatures on the freeze valve within the required accuracy and will withstand the temperature transients inherent in this application. No significant difference in the performance or durability of the units was noted.

A six-circuit radiation-resistant thermocouple-disconnect assembly was fabricated and tested in a remote-maintenance facility. The disconnect is simpler in construction than the assembly described previously and is more compatible with molten salt reactor experiment requirements.

Tests were completed for determining the corrosive effect of carbon tetrafluoride vapor on INOR-8 immersed in fuel salt at 1112 and 1292°F. Results of these indicate that carbon tetrafluoride vapor is effectively nonreactive toward INOR-8 at 1112°F but that minor attack may be promoted by carbon tetrafluoride, in the presence of fluoride salts at 1292°F.

A final design and a welding procedure were established for the tube-to-tube sheet joints of the Molten Salt Reactor Experiment heat exchanger. The final design provides for ultrasonic inspection. In order to demonstrate the welding and inspection procedures, a 96-joint test assembly was successfully fabricated and inspected by radiographic and ultrasonic Lamb-wave techniques. Brazing procedures for remotely preparing INOR-8 pipe joints were demonstrated by the fabrication of six joints. Only minor unbonded areas were found in these by ultrasonic inspection.

Additional mechanical property data were accumulated for INOR-8, including thermal fatigue data at 1250 to 1600°F. Stress relieving was found to improve the elevated temperature stress-rupture properties of weldments. Evaluation studies of the mechanical properties of heats of INOR-8 procured for molten salt reactor experiment construction were started.

Grade TS-281 graphite, considered representative of molten salt reactor experiment material, was found to be more porous than experimentally made samples of similar graphite however, it met design requirements. Specimens of TS-281 were permeated to 0.2% of the bulk volume in the standard permeation tests. Oxygen contamination was purged from R-0025-grade graphite with the de-composition products of NH4F-HF at temperatures as low as 392°F. Exposure of INOR-8 specimens to this environment at temperatures varying from 392 to 1300°F resulted in minimum attack at 752°F.

Sintering studies were begun to develop procedures for fabricating gadolinium III oxide and gadolinium III oxide-gluminum oxide cylinders for molten salt reactor experiment control rods. The shrinkage characteristics and bulk density changes as a function of green density were determined for gadolinium III oxide pellets that were fired at 1750°C in hydrogen.

Two molten-salt-fueled capsule assemblies were built to study the formation of carbon tetrafluoride in the gas over fissioning molten salt reactor experiment fuel containing submerged graphite. In assembly 47-4, four capsules containing a graphite core submerged in fuel and two with graphite crucibles containing fuel were irradiated.

Assembly 47-4 was irradiated from March 15 to June 4, and it is now undergoing post-irradiation examination at ORNL. The maximum measured temperature of the capsules was 1400 plus or minus 25°F during approximately 1500 hours of full-power steady-state reactor operation. Sixty of the 121 recorded temperature changes of about 30°C or more included decreases to the solidus temperature of the fuel salt.

Two capsules containing submerged graphite cores were installed in assembly 47-5 to permit gas sampling during irradiation. Additional sealed capsules designed to provide a range of oxidation-reduction levels by altering the accessibility of chromium metal to the fuel were included. The range of the ratio of INOR-8 surface area to graphite surface area in contact with the fuel is 0 to 46. Assembly 47-5 is scheduled to be irradiated from September 17 to December 10, 1962.

Post-irradiation examination of assembly 47-4 revealed that elemental fluorine at pressures as high as 35 atmospheres was generated in some of the rapidly frozen salt used in tests of the effect of radiation on evolution of carbon tetrafluoride from fissioning fuel and graphite. The fluorine, undoubtedly of radiolytic origin, appears in the frozen salt after shutdown and is possibly the main causative agent of the carbon tetrafluoride in the capsules that contained large quantities of carbon tetrafluoride. Since capsules of different configuration in the same irradiated assembly showed widely divergent behavior, the undesirable products may be strongly dependent on some incidental effect, such as the freezing history of the capsule. Present indications are that the fluorine problem will not constitute a severe threat to the reactor operation. Tests are in progress to obtain direct confirmation of the evidence for a negligible concentration of fluorine in the molten fuel.

A detailed examination of the 450 degrees Celsius contour in the lithium fluoride beryllium fluoride zirconium tetrafluoride system suggests that a suitable solvent for uranium tetrafluoride in a simplified fuel that contains no thorium tetrafluoride would be 67 mole % lithium fluoride, 29 mole % beryllium fluoride, and 4 mole % zirconium tetrafluoride. A fuel based on this solvent, consisting of 66.85 mole % lithium fluoride, 29 mole % beryllium fluoride, 4 mole % zirconium tetrafluoride, and 15 hundredths mole % uranium tetrafluoride, has an estimated melting point of 445°C. This composition has a density of 2.15 grams per cubic centimeter at the operating temperature.

The eutectic in the system lithium fluoride 27 mole % uranium tetrafluoride appears to be useful as a concentrate for fuel makeup. The amount and nature of segregation on freezing of molten salt reactor experiment-type fuels are tolerable.

Experiments to demonstrate the reaction of carbon tetrafluoride with molten salt reactor experiment systems gave positive indications, mainly at 800°C. Presumably, they would provide more conclusive results at higher temperatures than the 600 to 800°C range.

Studies on the clean-up of graphite and of fuel continued, as well as efforts to improve analytical aspects of molten salt reactor experiment fuel technology were directed towards oxygen determinations in fuel and in graphite, and towards homogenization of radioactive samples of fuel.

Work on the detailed design of the molten salt reactor experiment fuel-processing system began. The system provides for oxide removal from the salt and uranium recovery. A simplified flowsheet was prepared.

The liquid-state enthalpy and viscosity of a 30 mole % lithium carbonate, 38 mole % sodium carbonate, and 32 mole % potassium carbonate mixture proposed for use in out-of-pile studies relating to the molten salt reactor experiment were experimentally obtained. Unusual scatter in the data warranted only a linear fit of the enthalpy data. The derived heat capacity over the temperature span 475 to 715°C is therefore given by the constant value 413 thousandths calories per gram per degree Celsius. The kinematic viscosity was found to vary from 16 and a half centistokes to 460 degrees Celsius to 3 and 1 tenth centistokes at 715 degrees Celsius. An estimate of the mixture density as a function of the temperature allowed prediction of the absolute viscosity.

Design work on the molten salt reactor experiment is essentially complete. There remains only final revising of system layout and design drawings, and completion of the electrical design. The design report, in which all engineering calculations and analyses of the systems are presented, is presently being compiled. Much of the design work remaining to be completed involves incorporation of development work into final design drawings. An example of such a design is the removable salt-pipe heaters and insulation. Final test evaluations of two different concepts of such removable insulated heater sections are nearing completion. Design drawings of these units must be completed after these tests indicate which type will be used in the system.

Another item that awaits final test evaluation before the design can be completed is the control rod drive. A model incorporating all the principles has been operated successfully, and testing of an actual prototype unit will permit the design to be finished. Such a prototype is being ordered.

All layouts for the three major areas - reactor cell, drain tank cell, and coolant cell - are complete. The various penetrations into these cells have also been designed. The layout of interconnecting gas, water, electrical, and instrument lines between these cells is nearing completion.

Considerable effort was devoted to the design of the containment vessel, and all parts of this design were completed. Several methods of effecting a closure with the seal membrane that welds to the steel shell were analyzed before an acceptable concept could be detailed. The periphery of the containment vessel just below the closure flange was reinforced with a circumferential steel ring to bring the stresses within limits at design-point pressure. This pressure was dictated by the maximum credible accident. The vapor-condensing system, which ensures tolerable pressures within the cell in the event of the maximum credible accident, was designed.

Since the molten-salt system employs electrical heat to bring all components to the operating temperature, the electrical distribution for this heater network is rather elaborate. This electrical system is about 40% designed. The heater control centers are complete. Conduit and cable-tray layouts are 60% complete. The design of modifications to existing auxiliary diesel power controls are 60% complete. All electrical designs are scheduled to be completed by March 1, 1963.

Design drawings for the charcoal-adsorber system for the off-gas are finished. Layout drawings of off-gas piping in the reactor cell, drain tank cell, and special equipment room are 95% complete. Very little remains to be done to bring the design of the entire gas system to completion.

The design of the jigs and fixtures for the assembly of the initial and replacement components for the test cell was completed. The components, piping, and flanges are supported by adjustable supports that duplicate or resemble the test cell structure and are positioned precisely by optical tooling. Design work on the fixture for the assembly of the drain tanks and flush tank is in progress.

Completion of the items mentioned above will complete the design of all major equipment and facilities, including the maintenance control room, the remote crane control, the television viewing devices, and the remotely operable lifting tongs. The design of the work shield, protective environment enclosure, tools, and operating procedure for replacing the 7/8 inch outer diameter graphite sampler is complete. The graphite sampler is identical in principle to the sampler illustrated previously, which was modified to accommodate the control rods and to raise the work shield 3 feet above the lower shield beams for working convenience.

There were no changes in design concept or significant changes in detail of any component or system of the molten salt reactor experiment during this reporting period.

The Kaminer Construction Corporation, which has the prime contract for the major modifications to Building 7503, has completed approximately 90% of its contract. The estimated completion date is October 15, 1962, as scheduled.

Stress relieving of the reactor cell vessel is complete, and installation of the sleeves between the inner and outer vessels is progressing. This work will be completed when the expansion joints are received.

The support beams for the lower roof plugs were concrete-filled and put in place. The frames for the lower roof plugs were fabricated and are being fitted to the cell. These plugs will be poured soon. The upper roof plugs were poured but not delivered due to lack of storage space. The seal membrane is on-site.

All the concrete was poured in the drain tank cell, including the upper and lower roof plugs and the support shield beams. Plug welding of the stainless steel liner was completed. The lower roof plugs should be installed and ready to weld in the seal membrane when it is delivered.

The grade beams for the maintenance control room have been poured. Forms for pouring up to elevation 862 feet are being installed, and the concrete will be poured soon.

The sheet metal work in the radiator cell is approximately 50% complete. It is expected that this work will be completed on schedule.

All framing for the crane-bay liner has been fabricated, and 40% of it has already been installed. The sheet metal liner has also been fabricated and is ready to be installed.

The ductwork is 90% complete. The remaining work consists of the installation of dampers, which are scheduled to be delivered soon.

The 30-inch exhaust duct is installed at the end of the Kaminer portion, including the butterfly valves.

Hot Waste Storage Cell. The storage tank has been installed and 95% of the piping is complete.

The stainless steel liner is being installed in the hot storage cell. Work in the other three cells is complete, except for miscellaneous concrete patching and stacking of shielding blocks in the spent fuel storage cell.

Electrical conduit installation in the crane bay is 90% complete. Wiring for the air compressors and controls is complete, except for some miscellaneous control wiring, which is awaiting delivery of control switches.

The compressed air and water piping is approximately 98% complete.

Oil, water, and other service lines have been fabricated, and installation is approximately 50% complete.

All concrete has been poured, and ladders and hatchway covers have been installed. Work in this cell is 80% complete.

The exhaust filter house is complete except for the installation of filters, which are expected to be delivered approximately September 15th. The off-gas exhaust stack is installed. The exhaust blowers, duct, and dampers will be delivered by September 1st and installed by September 15th.

The cooling towers were installed, and the piping was completed, except for connections to the pumps. The pumps are to be delivered soon. The underground piping is complete.

The inlet filter house is complete, and the steam coils, dampers, duct, and filters are being delivered.

With the exception of the graphite for the molten salt reactor experiment core, materials procurement is approximately on schedule. The graphite is now promised for November 1, 1962, and efforts are being made to improve this delivery date. The status of procurement is outlined in the following sections.

Delivery of all plate, rod, weld rod, and pipe is complete, except for some miscellaneous pieces. Partial delivery was made of pipe fittings and tubing delivery is approximately 75% complete. Delivery of forgings, that is, freeze flanges, heat-exchanger tube-sheet blank flanges, O-ring gaskets, and other special forgings, is approximately 80% complete.

The National Carbon Company has formed, baked and graphitized all base-stock graphite bars. Individual lots are at various stages of the multiple impregnation treatment. All bars received the first impregnation. There are about 80 graphite bars completely through all required impregnations; however, fabricating sound base-stock graphite bars is the critical part of the fabrication. The delivery of the completely machined graphite bars was tentatively rescheduled from September 1 to November 1, 1962.

A contract was awarded to Berlin Chapman Company for the fabrication of three stainless steel auxiliary heat exchangers.

Contracts were awarded for the manufacture of type 304 stainless steel pipe, tubing, and fittings for all auxiliary piping systems. Most of this material has been manufactured and is being inspected at the vendors' mills. Contracts have not been awarded for special flanges and gaskets.

Steel for the reactor cell equipment and supporting structures is being furnished by O'Neal Steel Company. Special pipe spring supports are being manufactured by Bergen Pipe Support Company.

The fabrication of molten salt reactor experiment components in Y-12 Machine Shops is estimated to be about 50% complete and on schedule. Delivery of the first component is expected around October 1, and all components are expected to be delivered by January 1. The status of component fabrication is described in the following sections.

The reactor vessel is being fabricated and is approximately 45% complete; delivery is expected around January 1, 1963.

The stainless steel thermal shield for the reactor vessel is being fabricated in the Union Carbide Nuclear Company Paducah machine shop and is approximately 35% complete. Delivery is expected approximately October 1, 1962. Procurement was initiated for approximately 75 tons of steel balls that will be poured into the thermal shield for gamma shielding.

The INOR-8 primary heat exchanger is approximately 65% complete and delivery is expected approximately January 1, 1963. A vendor, Wall Colmonoy, is under contract to furnace braze the tubes to the tube sheet with a gold-nickel alloy.

The salt-to-air radiator is approximately 12% complete. The headers for this component are being fabricated in the Union Carbide Nuclear Company shops at X-10 and Paducah and are approximately 95% complete. Delivery is expected approximately January 1, 1963.

The enclosure for the radiator is approximately 65% complete, and delivery is expected approximately January 1, 1963. The door-lifting mechanism was fabricated in a local Oak Ridge Machine Shop and is complete. Delivery is complete on all motors, clutches, brakes, and electric heaters for this component.

The several INOR-8 fuel and coolant storage tanks are approximately 45% complete. Delivery of these components will begin approximately October 1, 1962, and be completed by October 1, 1963.

Fabrication of the fuel and coolant pumps is approximately 75% complete. Delivery of the first unit is expected approximately January 1, 1963.

The ORNL and Paducah machine shops are fabricating miscellaneous parts for the major reactor components. In addition, certain equipment supports, assembly jigs, and panel boards are being fabricated in the K-25 shops. The sampler enricher, charcoal beds, salt piping, and other miscellaneous parts are being fabricated in the ORNL machine shop. A contract was awarded to Taylor Engineering Company for the fabrication of seven special equipment supports and four special vessels.

The layout of the instrumentation and controls system proceeded closely in accordance with the scheme outlined in the previous report. Drawings showing the exact location of all control panels were completed, including drilling details for floor penetrations in the main and auxiliary control areas. The relay cabinet was moved to a new position, and three panels for control of the diesel generators were added to the auxiliary-board panel arrangement. Requirements for wire ways between the main control area and field-mounted equipment were determined, and detail design is now under way. These wire ways consist of three separate sets of 3 by 24 inch open trays. Thermocouples, signal cables, and control circuit wiring will be run in separate trays. Cable from isolated signal transmitters will be run in conduit to the nearest tray. Details for wire terminal boxes between field-mounted electrical equipment were also determined.

Instrument application flow diagrams for the fuel sampler-enricher system, the fluorination system, and the containment system were completed and approved for construction. Nine diagrams previously approved were revised in accordance with recent design changes. A tabulation of all instruments shown on the flow diagrams, giving identifying numbers, location, function in process, and a brief description, was completed. These will be revised periodically to incorporate design changes.

The design of 8 of the 12 modular instrument panel sections required for the main board was completed and fabrication of these panels is presently under way in the ORNL panel shops. The three remaining panels, as well as the control console, will be completed when all the nuclear instrument requirements are known. A complete design for one panel section includes instrument-mounting-hole cutout drawings, pneumatic tubing diagrams, and electrical wiring diagrams. Twenty-five drawings for the main-board panel sections were approved.

Twenty-four drawings covering the design of 11 auxiliary-board panels located in the transmitter room and auxiliary room were completed. In addition, the design of the thermocouple-patch-panel cabinet was completed.

Designs of three sampler-enricher control panels and two cover-gas-treatment control panels were also completed and approved. Eighteen drawings were approved and issued for construction. These panels are presently being fabricated in the ORNL shops and when completed will be used to control mockups of these systems.

The designs of six other auxiliary instrument panels located in the field are complete. These panels serve the fuel and coolant pump lube oil systems, cooling water system, and the containment air system. Six drawings were completed, Fabrication of the containment vessel air system instrument panel was completed, and the panel was delivered to the contractor.

Forty-two 2-foot modular-panel sections are required in the MOLTEN SALT REACTOR EXPERIMENT INSTRUMENT SYSTEM. Designs are complete for 30 of these panels. Design of the remaining panel sections is approximately 50% complete.

Information necessary for the development of the electrical power system criteria was prepared. This included the safety control circuit 45 volt power distribution system, 115 volt alternating current instrument power requirements, and remote control requirements for switchgear and motor-control centers. The design of electrical control circuitry for two 40 horsepower instrument air compressors was completed.

The requirements for the instrumentation and control systems' reactor cell penetrations for electrical signal cables, thermocouple lead wire cables, and pneumatic lines were determined in detail.

A mockup of a typical molten salt reactor experiment freeze valve, with reactor-type thermocouples, solid-state switch modules, coolant-air system, and control circuits was designed and constructed. Initial test operations indicate that all control-circuit components will perform satisfactorily.

A requisition was issued for a data system to be acquired on a three-year lease period with an option-to-buy clause. Preliminary proposals from three manufacturers were received during the week of July 9. The three proposals were evaluated in terms of cost and equipment in accordance with the specification. Based on the preliminary proposals, a system was tentatively selected. This selection is subject to change when the final detailed proposals are received.

A review of the process monitoring requirements was completed in May. The selection of the necessary detectors and associated electronic equipment is approximately 80% complete. Preliminary detector locations and mounting requirements were discussed. Preliminary investigations were started for the design of the two-stack monitoring systems. The instrument application diagrams now show all the proposed process monitors, with the exception of the high-level gamma monitors for the reactor and drain tank cells.

The design of this system was initiated and the procurement of the required instruments is underway.

Specifications were prepared and procurement initiated for approximately 60% of the components required in the process instrument system. All panel-mounted instruments are either on order or on hand. One hundred and twenty-one specifications for commercially available standard items were prepared, and procurement was initiated.

Thirteen detailed job specifications for some components requiring special development or procurement effort were completed, and procurement was initiated. These include such items as weld-sealed transmitters, valves for radioactive gas service, thermocouple material, a data-handling system, a coolant-salt-system venturi flow element, and high-temperature sodium potassium filled transmitters.

Analyses of reactor behavior in potentially hazardous situations were carried out, and the results were reported in the second addendum to the molten salt reactor experiment Preliminary Hazards Report. The incidents that were analyzed included fuel pump failure at high power, cold-slug accidents, premature criticality during core filling, breakage of a graphite stringer, passage of a slug of concentrated fuel through the core, and runaway rod withdrawal.

The case of stopping the fuel pump during operation of the reactor was analyzed using an analog computer. All other scenarios were analyzed using Murgatroyd, a digital program for molten salt reactor experiment kinetics analysis.

In Murgatroyd, the fuel and graphite in the core are treated as separate bodies, each with its own mean temperature and temperature coefficient of reactivity. The reactor is treated as a point, however, in that the mean fuel temperature is assumed to be the average of the inlet and outlet temperatures. Heat transfer between fuel and graphite is assumed to be proportional to the difference between the fuel and the graphite mean temperatures. Reactivity disturbances can be represented in Murgatroyd as a series of steps and ramps, but the inlet temperature is regarded as being constant.

The reactor properties used in the analysis were appropriate for the molten salt reactor experiment with 1 mole % thorium in the fuel. Eliminating the thorium would increase the temperature coefficients of reactivity and the prompt-neutron lifetime.

The decrease in fuel-salt flow led to a decrease in the core cooling rate and an increase in the effective delayed-neutron fraction, which resulted in an initial rise in the core temperatures. Also, the loss of flow decreased the rate of heat transfer to the secondary coolant, and without corrective action, the coolant in the radiator reached the freezing temperature in less than 2 minutes. Heat transfer from the radiator can be decreased quickly by closing the radiator doors. The control rods were considered to decrease reactivity at a rate of 7 hundredths of a percent per second after power failure, and heat removal from the radiator was stopped after about 30 seconds. For these circumstances, the fuel salt temperature rise was small, and the secondary coolant temperature did not become too low.

The consequences of cold-slug accidents were estimated by calculating the reactivity transient associated with passage of a cold fuel slug through the core and introducing this transient into a Murgatroyd calculation by considering a series of reactivity ramps. The temperature rise calculated by Murgatroyd for a constant inlet temperature was then superimposed on the temperatures that would be produced by the cold slug without nuclear heating. Peak temperatures in the core were estimated to reach about 1600°F. The core pressure rise was not appreciable in either case.

Criticality could be reached prematurely while the core was being filled if the fuel were abnormally concentrated or if the fuel temperature were abnormally low, or if the control rods were withdrawn too far. The power excursions that would result from the continued addition of reactivity associated with such filling accidents were computed by Murgatroyd, assuming no heat removal from the fuel and using a fuel-graphite heat transfer coefficient appropriate for a static core.

In the first case, it was postulated that the fuel was concentrated by selective freezing in the drain tanks of phases containing no uranium. With 39% of the fuel frozen, filling the core with the remaining liquid at 1200°F at a rate of 1 cubic foot per minute would result in a 55 Megawatts power excursion about 60 seconds after initial criticality. No significant pressure surge would result.

Filling the core with salt having the normal fuel concentration and a temperature of 1200°F would produce an excursion similar to the one described above if all rods were fully withdrawn. Filling at 1000°F with the fuel concentration and rod positions corresponding to criticality at 1200°F would produce a much smaller excursion.

Rod insertion could be quite effective in preventing power excursions in these accidents because the rate of reactivity increase would be very low. If no corrective action were taken, temperatures in the core would exceed 1800°F, in the worst case, by the time the core became completely full.

Simultaneous withdrawal of all three rods could produce a large power excursion and undesirably high temperatures if these rods were withdrawn rapidly with the reactor initially subcritical or at very low power. In the worst case examined, the rate of reactivity addition was assumed to be 8 hundredths of a percent reactivity per second and the initial power was taken to be 1 watt. A power excursion to 730 Megawatts and a pressure surge of 19 pounds per square inch resulted. More seriously, the calculated mean fuel temperature rose from the initial 1200°F to a high of 1600°F, and local temperatures in excess of 2000°F were estimated.

If a graphite stringer were to break in two near the center of the core and the upper half could float up, the reactivity would increase 4 thousandths of a % for each inch of stringer replaced by fuel. If the entire central stringer were replaced with fuel, the reactivity increase would be only 13 hundredths of a percent. No power or temperature excursion of any consequence would result, even in the latter event.

An upper limit on the disturbances which could result from a fuel addition of 120 grams of uranium 235 was calculated. For this case it was postulated that the added fuel passed through the core as a flat pancake-shaped element under normal flow-rate conditions. If this were possible and the reactor were initially at 10 Megawatts, the power would rise to a peak of 120 Megawatts, and the fuel mean temperature would rise 90°F. The pressure surge would be about 2 pounds per square inch. Smaller disturbances would result at lower initial powers.

The reactor statics calculations reported here are based on the current reactor design. In this connection, a two-dimensional, 19-region nuclear model of the reactor was utilized to represent the various reactor regions. Because of the limitation to two dimensions, the control rod thimbles were considered as a single INOR-8 cylindrical annulus concentric with the core center line.

A fuel salt mixture containing x mole % uranium tetrafluoride, 70 mole % lithium fluoride, (25 - x) mole % beryllium fluoride, and 5 mole % zirconium tetrafluoride was considered in the calculations. The isotopic compositions of lithium and uranium were based on material compositions that might reasonably be available for use in the reactor. The calculations described below were for an isothermal system at 1200°F with no reactivity controlled by the control rods, no fission-product poisons, and no chemical impurities in the fuel.

The initial criticality calculations were made with Modric, a 34-group, multi-region, one-dimensional, neutron-diffusion program for the IBM-7090. Because this program is limited to one dimension, two types of geometry calculations were made. One was based on slab geometry, with region and material specifications corresponding to an axial traverse through the main part of the core; a radial buckling term was used in this calculation. The other was a radial calculation, with region and material specifications corresponding to a radial traverse through the reactor midplane; an axial buckling term was used in this calculation. The two calculations agreed within 1% in predicting a critical uranium concentration of 0.15 mole %. In addition, these calculations provided the two-group nuclear constants for each of the regions as required for two-dimensional, two-group calculations.

The spatial distributions of the fast and thermal fluxes and adjoint fluxes were calculated for the 19-region, 2-dimensional model using the Equipoise-3A program. The radial distributions are for an axial position that corresponds to the maximum in the thermal flux, which is at a position very close to the core midplane.

Information on the space-energy distribution of the fast flux was obtained by combining the Equipoise-3A results with those of the two Modrie calculations.

The spatial distribution of the power density is determined by the total fission rate. About 87% of the total fissions in the molten salt reactor experiment are caused by thermal neutrons. As a result, the spatial distribution of the fuel power density is essentially the same as that of the thermal-neutron flux. The maximum fuel power density at 10 Megawatts with no fuel permeation of the graphite is 33.6 watts per centimeter squared, The corresponding maximum graphite power density is 83 hundredths watts per centimeter cubed.

Fluxes and power densities obtained from equilibrium calculations were used to estimate fuel and graphite temperature distributions and average temperatures for steady-state reactor operation at 10 MW.

The shape of the temperature distribution in the reactor is determined by the shape of the power-density distribution and the fuel flow pattern. In the main part of the core, where the fuel flows in discrete channels among the graphite stringers, local temperature variations across individual fuel channels and graphite stringers are superimposed on the gross distributions. The gross distributions, which have the greatest effect on the reactor average values, are described below. They are based on 10-Megawatts reactor operation and a total flow rate of 1200 gallons per minute.

In describing the gross temperature distributions, only that part of the core which generates the major fraction of nuclear energy needs to be considered. The fuel temperature in any channel at a particular elevation is a function of the radial position of the channel, the inlet fuel temperature, the flow rate in the channel, and the total amount of heat produced in or transferred to the fuel as it passes from the inlet to the elevation in question. The channel inlet temperature is somewhat higher than the reactor inlet temperature because of the heat produced in the entrance regions through which the fuel must pass in reaching the main part of the core. The relatively lower temperatures in the central and outer regions of the core are caused by the higher fuel velocities in these regions. The fuel velocity in the central channels is expected to be about three times that in most of the remaining channels. Less extreme variations are expected in the outer channels.

The overall temperature distribution in the graphite depends on the fuel temperature, the graphite power density, and the resistance to transfer of heat produced in the graphite to the fuel in the adjacent channels. The internal resistance of the graphite to heat transfer produces some elevation of the graphite temperature above that of the fuel, but most of the temperature difference results from the Poppendiek effect. The calculated axial distribution is somewhat steeper than may be expected in the molten salt reactor experiment because axial heat transfer in the graphite was neglected in the calculation.

The graphite-fuel temperature differences will be greater than the indicated values if fuel salt soaks into the graphite and produces a source of fission heat in the stringers. If 2% of the graphite volume were uniformly filled with fuel salt, the maximum difference between the mean temperature in a graphite stringer and that in the adjacent fuel channel would increase from 62.5 to 74.5°F.

In addition to the above results for the main core regions, mean fuel temperatures and temperature rise were also calculated for a number of peripheral regions based on 10-Megawatts reactor operation and an average fluid temperature rise of 50°F in passing through the core.

A useful concept in relating the actual fuel and graphite temperature distributions to the total reactivity is the nuclear average temperature. This quantity is defined as follows: At low power, reactor criticality is assumed to be established at isothermal temperature conditions in fuel and graphite. Then, as the power is raised, the fuel nuclear average temperature, T,, is defined as the equivalent uniform fuel temperature that gives the same total reactivity level as that associated with the actual fuel temperature distribution, with the graphite temperature held constant. Similarly, the graphite nuclear average temperature is defined as the uniform graphite temperature that gives the same reactivity level as that given by the actual graphite temperature profile, with the fuel temperature held constant. A reactor nuclear average temperature could be defined, in an analogous manner; however, it appears more convenient to consider temperature and velocity individually in the manner indicated below.

The temperature-weighting functions were evaluated from the molten salt reactor experiment using the Equipoise two-group fluxes, adjoint fluxes, and nuclear parameters. Discontinuities in the weighting functions occur as the effective fuel volume fraction changes from region to region, reflecting the change in local neutron multiplication as well as the variation in nuclear importance from region to region.

Use was made of these temperature-weighting functions to compute nuclear averages of fuel average temperature and graphite average temperature for the conditions of a 10 megawatt power level, with reactor inlet and outlet temperatures of 1175 and 1225°F, respectively.

Since axial heat transfer in the graphite was neglected, any heat produced in the graphite was considered transferred to the fuel immediately adjacent to it. As a result, the gross fuel temperature distribution was unaffected by fuel permeation. It was assumed that the shapes of the temperature-weighting functions were also unaffected so that the different degrees of fuel permeation did not produce any change in the fuel nuclear average temperature. The changes in the graphite nuclear average temperature resulted from changes in the temperature level of the graphite.

Consistent with the definition of the nuclear average temperatures, importance-averaged temperature coefficients of reactivity for graphite and fuel were calculated. The equations for the coefficients were based on first-order perturbation theory and involved the function given previously.

Results of calculations for fuel containing no thorium, based on perturbation theory are compared below with those based on a one-region homogeneous-reactor model employed in previous studies.

The differences in the results from the two methods are small and well within the probable error associated with the value of the temperature coefficient of expansion of the salt. The coefficients from the homogeneous model do depend strongly, however, on the correct choice of effective reactor size. These calculations also account for the effect of the salt temperature on fast-neutron leakage taking this into account has the net result of increasing the fuel coefficient slightly relative to the graphite coefficient.

The power coefficient of reactivity is defined here as the amount of reactivity resulting from nuclear heating that must be compensated by control rod motion per unit increase in power. This may be calculated from the relations between nuclear average temperatures, fuel inlet and outlet temperatures, and reactivity coefficients.

In obtaining power coefficients of reactivity, three cases were considered: the fuel outlet temperature was held constant as the power was raised to 10 Megawatts, the mean of the inlet and outlet temperature, T,» was held constant and, the outlet and inlet temperatures were allowed to vary to maintain criticality with no control rod motion. The initial temperature at zero power was assumed to be 1200°F the reactivity change associated with increasing the power to 10 Megawatts was calculated for the three cases considered.

Fuel circulating at 1200 gallons per minute spends 9.4 seconds in the core and 16.4 seconds in the remainder of the loop. Consequently, a large fraction of the longer-lived delayed neutrons will be emitted outside the core and effectively lost. Furthermore, the distortion of the source distributions that will result from the transport of the precursors will increase the leakage probability for the neutrons emitted in the core. The reduction in the contribution of the delayed neutrons of group i to the chain reaction would have a strong effect on the reactor kinetic behavior. The computer programs that have been developed for molten salt reactor experiment kinetics calculations do not treat the delayed neutrons rigorously. Instead, they use the neutron and precursor equations for a noncirculating system, with values of By adjusted to allow for losses resulting from circulation. Thus use of these programs requires previous evaluation of effective delayed neutrons of group 1 values.

Some calculations were made to determine the effect of the energy and spatial distributions of the delayed neutrons on the effective values of B in steady-state operations. For each group, the spatial distribution of the delayed-neutron source was calculated from the precursor production distribution, taking into account the transport of the precursors prior to their decay. The core was represented as a single region, with uniform fuel volume fraction and velocity equal to the averages for the actual molten salt reactor experiment core. The ratio of the nuclear importance of a delayed neutron to the importance of a prompt neutron was taken to be the ratio of the appropriate non-leakage probabilities.

Preliminary results were obtained from a new reactor kinetics program, Zorch, in which approximate account is taken of the space dependence of fuel and graphite temperatures. This is an improved version of the Murgatroyd program used in previous studies. In the Zorch calculation, the reactivity was related more realistically to the temperature profiles by using the concept of nuclear average temperatures. During an excursion, the axial power-density shape was assumed to be that of the fundamental mode. The axial temperature profile was recalculated at each time step, taking into account energy production, transfer, and transport. In the radial direction, the magnitudes of the temperatures and power density varied with time however, the power density shape was assumed to remain the same as initially.

Results of calculations for the molten salt reactor experiment with fuel containing 1% thorium were obtained for a test case in which one dollar of reactivity was added instantaneously. The initial power level was 10 Megawatts. The maximum rise in the fuel nuclear average temperature was 96°F. Also, the rate of rise of the nuclear average temperature was higher than the rate of rise of the mean reactor temperature. The maximum power level calculated with the Zorch program was 78 Megawatts, as compared with 107 Megawatts from the Murgatroyd calculation.

As an option in the Zorch program, the temperature profiles in fuel and graphite at specified time steps can be plotted using the Calcomp digital plotter.

A pair of INOR-8 freeze flanges for 5 inch diameter schedule 40 pipe were installed in the freeze-fllange-seal testing facility for measurement of thermal distortion and gas leakage during high-temperature operation. Following the successful completion of this series of tests, each of two flanges was mated with new INOR-8 flanges and placed into actual salt service. The several tests are described below.

The flanges mounted in the seal-testing facility were thermally cycled in air, and precise measurements were made of flange dimensions and of helium leakage at the ring-joint seal. This preliminary testing consisted of 10 cycles from a cold condition to a hot equilibrium condition. The equilibrium temperatures were varied at 100°F intervals from 800 to 1400°F, Heat was provided by 12 silicon carbide heating elements in the bore of the flange and by removable pipe-heaters along the exterior of the flange adaptor, beginning 2 1/4 inches from the flange faces.

At a bore temperature of 1400°F, the radial position of the freeze point was 7.1 inches, which is believed to be satisfactorily far from the ring-gasket radius of 10.4 inches. The average decrease of the freeze-point radius was 11/16 inch for each 100°F decrease in bore temperature.

The external thermal distortion of the 5-inch INOR-3 flanges, both at temperature equilibrium and during temperature transients, was found to be much less than the thermal distortion of the 6-inch Inconel flanges tested previously. Starting with equilibrium bore temperatures of 1300 and 1400°F, all power to the silicon carbide heating elements in the INOR-8 flanges was cut off to produce a transient simulating a salt dump. When the bore temperature reached 850°F, the maximum external distortion was 6 thousandths of an inch, indicating that little distortion is induced during temperature transients. This limits the amount of frozen salt that could be trapped between the flange faces during a rapid cooldown and which could lead to permanent flange distortion. No permanent distortion was noted at the outside of the flanges. Upon opening the flange joint, however, the inner faces were found to be slightly convex with an axial displacement of the center of the bore of 14 thousandths of an inch.

Two nickel ring-joint gaskets were tested. For the first five cycles, an oval ring gasket was used; for the second five cycles, an octagonal ring gasket was installed. Indicated leakage, with the buffer space evacuated, was very low at all times. There was a tendency for the leak rate to increase as the number of cycles increased and to decrease at higher temperatures. Leak rates at the outside of the buffer groove were consistently higher than the leak rates to the bore through the inner seal of this buffer zone.

Specifically, for the oval ring, the cold leak rate steadily increased from 3.9 times 10^-8 to 1.4 times 10^-4 cubic centimeters per second after five cycles. There was initially no detectable leakage at high temperatures, but after five cycles, the total leak rate was 1.5 times 10^-5 cubic centimeters per seconds at 1200°F. For the octagonal ring, the initial cold leak rate was 8.5 times 10^-7 cubic centimeters per second, and after five cycles, it was 4.6 times 10^-6 cubic centimeters per second. At 1200°F there was no initial detectable leakage, but after five cycles the leak rate had increased to 3.0 times 10^-7 cubic centimeters per second at 1300°F. For this brief period of testing, the performance of the octagonal ring was superior to that of the oval ring, but both performed far better than required.

Immediately following the preliminary testing in the seal test facility, one of the tested flanges was paired with a new flange, and the pair was installed in the thermal-cycling facility. The freeze-flange thermal-cycling facility permits testing of the flange joint under drain-and-fill conditions, steady-state conditions at various operating temperatures, and temperature cycling between room temperature and a selected operating temperature. The flange testing consisted of thermal cycling and attempts to form a frozen salt plug at the flange bore.

Forty-three cycles have been completed to date. A cycle starts with the flange bore at ambient temperature and the sump and pipe temperatures held constant. The freeze flange is then preheated until temperature equilibrium is reached about 8 hours at a bore temperature of 650°F; molten salt at the desired high temperature of the cycle is introduced and oscillated between the two sumps until the flange again reaches temperature equilibrium about 5 hours; and, finally, the flange is allowed to cool until the bore is at ambient temperature about 10 hours. The total cycle requires approximately 22 hours to complete. The first 15 cycles were made with an average flange bore temperature of 1020 degrees Fahrenheit and an ambient temperature of 85 degrees Fahrenheit. For the following 28 cycles, the flange bore temperature was increased to 1250 degrees Fahrenheit and the ambient temperature to 150 degrees Fahrenheit.

The size of the salt ring was predicted on the basis of the flange temperature distribution, and the expected 20°F temperature difference between the external and internal flange faces, which was noted in earlier tests. The salt freezing point of 840°F was reached at an external face temperature of 820°F, which occurred at a diameter of 10.8 inch in the current series of tests. Examination of the salt screen following cycle number 36 showed the salt-ring diameter to vary between 10.5 and 11 inch At the greatest diameter the salt was still 4 inch from the ring.

Two mechanical dial indicators mounted on a small lathe bed were employed to measure thermal distortion of the flanges. With the flange bore at equilibrium at 1250 degrees Fahrenheit, the maximum combined thermal expansion and distortion was 25 thousandths of an inch. The calculated thermal expansion was 21 thousandths of an inch, and thus the maximum thermal distortion was 4 thousandths of an inch. No permanent distortion of the outer flange faces was detected in the cold flanges after 30 cycles.

There was a small increase in the interior face warpage of the female flange from the initial out-of-flatness of 14 thousandths of an inch to 18 thousandths of an inch after 36 cycles. No warpage was detected on the male flange face. After 36 cycles, all bore dimensions were checked and found to be undersize. The female bore decreased by 10 thousandths of an inch, the male bore by 30 thousandths of an inch, and the male lip by 8 thousandths of an inch.

For the first 36 cycles, an octagonal seal ring was used. The initial cold seal leak rate for the ring was between 10^-4 and 10^-3 cubic centimeters per second. After the flange joint had reached its initial hot equilibrium temperature (1020°F), the hot leak rate was less than 5 times 10^-9 cubic centimeters per second. When the flange again reached ambient temperature, the cold leak rate had decreased to 2.6 times 10^-6 cubic centimeters per second. After 36 cycles, the hot leak rate had increased to these leak rates are considered to be acceptably low.

An oval ring was tested in the next 7 cycles. The pre-cycling cold leak rate of 3.7 times 10 to the power of -7 cubic centimeters per second had increased to 1.7 times 10 to the power of -2 cubic centimeters per second at the beginning of cycle number 37. The final hot leak rate at the end of cycle number 43 was 9.3 times 10 to the power of -3 cubic centimeters per second. Since this rate was considered to be only marginally acceptable, the flanges were opened for inspection. It was found that foreign material had interfered with proper seating of the ring. A second oval ring was inserted and is presently being tested.

In order to simulate a pump failure, the salt was held in a stagnant condition between the two sumps to determine whether a freeze plug would form at the flange bore. In the most severe test, the piping was kept heated at 1000°F. Although the flange bore temperature was reduced to 350°F under these conditions, only a partial plug formed. It was concluded that the molten salt reactor experiment 5 inch-pipe flanges would not plug so long as the pipe heaters were operative.

The second INOR-8 flanged joint was installed in the pump-testing facility, with an oval ring-joint gasket. To date, the facility has been operated approximately 300 hours with three complete cycles from startup to shutdown. The temperature distribution of the flanged joint has closely approximated the distributions measured in both the seal-testing facility and the thermal-cycle test loop. No distortion has been noted, and no leak rates greater than 5 x 10^-4 cubic centimeters per second have been detected with the buffer seal system of this joint. The buffer type of seal system used is similar to the reactor leak-detection system. Although the test results are encouraging, additional experience is needed before the current freeze-flange design is considered acceptable.

A full-scale model of one molten salt reactor experiment control rod and drive was assembled and operated over a range of temperatures from 500 to 1300°F. The unit has operated through 24,473 cycles. The rod has been dropped from various heights 862 times.

While overall operation has been satisfactory, the drive unit failed when one of the lower idler-sprocket bushings gall as a result of a foreign particle. This bushing was replaced with a shrouded ball bearing, and operation was resumed. Tests indicate that the rod position is known within 1/8 inch 94% of the time and 1/4 inch 100% of the time.

Testing of removable hardboard-insulated heaters for 5 inch pipe was completed. The units operated a total of 6136 hours with a pipe temperature under the heaters of 1400°F. The average power input was 520 watts per linear foot of heated pipe. The overall functional operation of the heaters was excellent, but the hardboard exterior tended to crack and dust, the soft mineral wool lining dusted after heating, and the metal liner warped. Three alternate designs being considered to overcome these objections consist of units made with blown fused silica, reflective metal insulation, and combinations of these materials. The materials for use in the molten salt reactor experiment will be selected after tests of the various combinations.

Testing of two prototype heater boxes using Glasrock material indicated an excessively high heat loss of 700 watts per foot. The surface temperature of the heater boxes was 240°F when the heaters were operated at 1,400°F, which would lead to excessive heat losses in the molten salt reactor experiment cell. Further, the material is unable to withstand physical abuse without cracking or chipping. On the other hand, it has the lowest coefficient of expansion of any of the materials tested to date and thus has very high resistance to thermal shock. There was no evidence of warping at the joint closures at the completion of the test.

All-metal prototype heater boxes made of reflective insulation have been purchased from Mirror Mfg. Co. for testing, and a test unit made of Glasrock, board insulation, and metal reflective sheets is being fabricated.

Most high-temperature insulation materials will dust to some extent, and the dust will present a problem in reactor maintenance if it is highly activated. The insulating materials were therefore tested for activation following irradiation for 16 hours at a neutron flux of about 7 times 10^11 neutrons per centimeters per second. The data obtained indicate that Glasrock, which is nearly pure silica, may be the only ceramic insulation that can be utilized uncanned in the molten salt reactor experiment.

The prototype cooling bayonets for removing afterheat from fuel in the molten salt reactor experiment drain tanks were thermally shock tested 38 times without failure. The test system was then shut down for installation of prototype thermocouples on the one-inch cooling bayonets that slide into the one and one-half inch thimbles in the salt pool. In previous operations, thermocouples installed in this area came loose in a few cycles. The reactor-grade thermocouples now being tested are intact after six cycles and 48 hours of exposure at 1,400°F.

A carbonate salt is being used in place of the molten salt reactor experiment fuel salt in these tests to avoid beryllium-handling problems. The carbonate consists of 38 mole % lithium carbonate, 40 mole % sodium carbonate, and 32 mole % potassium carbonate.

Drawings of nearly all components of the sampling and enrichment system were issued for comment. Detail drawings of the transfer tube and the spool piece between the disconnect flanges, with its positioning tool, were approved for construction. Instrumentation flowsheets and panel layouts were also approved for construction.

A full-scale mockup of the sample transfer box, the drive pox, and the operational valve is being fabricated for installation on the Engineering Test Loop. The transfer tube, which had to be shortened to fit into the space available, has bends and slopes that are the same as those to be used in the reactor system.

The mockup will be used to demonstrate that each component operates satisfactorily and to develop adequate sampling and enriching procedures. The sampling-capsule access-chamber mockup was successfully hydrostatically tested at 90 pounds per square inch gauge to check the tightness and strength of the access port. The copper sampling capsule was modified to simplify handling, and remote removal of a sample from the revised capsule was demonstrated.

The full-scale molten salt reactor experiment core model was operated at 85°F with water to make preliminary measurements of the velocity distribution, wall heat transfer coefficients, and solids-handling characteristics. Since the viscosity of water is lower than that of the fuel salt, the model is not exactly similar to the molten salt reactor experiment with respect to fluid dynamics. The preliminary tests will be useful, however, in planning later tests with a more viscous liquid.

The peak resultant velocities at the bottom of the core-wall cooling annulus were measured at various flow rates as a function of the angle around the core. As may be seen, the velocity profile is flat, indicating that the flow entering the lower head from the annulus is distributed uniformly. Based on the observed resultant velocity of 4.55 feet per second and the known axial velocity component of 2.15 feet per second at 1200 gallons per minute, the average tangential velocity component is 4.04 feet per second at the bottom of the core annulus.

A discrepancy was observed between the flow in the one-fifth scale model and the full-scale model. In the one fifth scale model, the flow in the lower head was observed to have a large rotational component, whereas, in the full-scale model, the flow was observed to be almost purely radial. On examination of the one-fifth scale model, it was noted that the swirl killers were not resting on the lower head but, rather, were elevated 1 eighth to 1 fourth inch off the head. This allowed water to flow underneath the swirl killers and maintain its rotational component. New swirl killers were made for the one-fifth scale model, and the flow then behaved the same as that in the full-scale model. With this change, the measured heat transfer coefficients at the center line of the one-fifth scale model were higher than those measured previously, so the change was inferred to be beneficial.

Heat transfer coefficients are indices both of wall cooling and of wall shearing, which tends to sweep out sediment. Coefficients measured in the lower head at a radius of 17 inches were found to be proportional to the 0.8 power of the flow rate, with a value of 522 British thermal units per hour per square foot per degree Fahrenheit at 1200 gallons per minute. Extrapolating the measurements to reactor conditions, the coefficient for the reactor at 1200 gallons per minute was estimated to be 1500 British thermal units per hour per foot squared per degree Fahrenheit.

As a check on the water heat transfer coefficient, the fluid velocity profile next to the wall was measured at the same point the coefficient was measured. A heat transfer coefficient can be calculated from the data by assuming flat-plate geometry and that the distance between plates is twice the distance from the wall to the point of peak velocity. The calculated heat transfer coefficient for this case is 522 British thermal units per hour per foot squared per degree Fahrenheit, which is in fairly good agreement with the measured value of 667 British thermal units per hour per foot squared per degree Fahrenheit.

Attempts were made to infer the heat transfer coefficient at a position about 4 inches from the core center line from data obtained with a heat meter. These attempts were unsuccessful because there was no predominant direction of flow at that position rather, the flow was gusty. The flow was first in one direction and then another. It was determined that the heat transfer coefficient would be lower than at a radius of 17 inches, but the exact value was not obtained. Further attempts to measure the heat transfer coefficient in this region will be made.

Experiments were run to obtain data for use in predicting the behavior of solid particulate matter in the fuel salt, especially its tendency to settle out in the reactor vessel lower head. The experimental procedure consisted of injecting 3 pounds of sized iron filings into the model inlet during operation. After the solids were added, circulation of water was continued for various periods of time. The core was then drained, and the quantity of solids that remained in the bottom of the reactor vessel was determined. As far as the solids were concerned, the loop was considered as a once-through system.

In the case of fine solids, there appeared to be some tendency for sediment to form during their first pass through the core. Additional running time caused them to be picked up, however, and swept out. In the case of coarse material, a larger fraction settled out on the first pass through the core and very little was removed with additional pumping time.

The 150-mesh solids that remained in the lower head appeared in a concentrated pile near the drain line. On the other hand, the 60-mesh solids left larger amounts of sediment that tended to form a torus around the drain. These larger piles were 2 to 3 inches wide and from a half to 1 inch thick, and they were against the drain line on one side. The results of these tests indicate that the molten salt reactor experiment drain line will not plug as the result of sedimentation of solids. Although no sedimentary materials are expected in the reactor, these experiments provided confidence in the design.

The engineering test loop was modified to include a graphite container in the salt-circulating loop, and most of the Inconel pipe was replaced with INOR-8 pipe. The loop was then placed into operation without graphite in the graphite container. Most of the previous zirconium-containing flush salt was removed, and the drain tank was flushed with newly made coolant salt. Information was obtained during 1500 hours of operation on the operational characteristics of the graphite-container access joint, on the chemical analysis of the salt being circulated, and on the formation of salt deposits above the liquid level.

After receipt, inspection and cleaning of the graphite to be tested, the loop was shut down for installation of the graphite. Also, as part of the proposed graphite-treatment procedure, the flush salt was treated with hydrogen fluoride and hydrogen gas in the drain tank to lower its oxide content before it contacted the graphite. Details of these tests are discussed in the following sections.

The flush salt was circulated at 50 to 70 gallons per minute and 1200°F through the loop and the graphite container while awaiting delivery of the ETL graphite from the vendor. The graphite container, which is an 8 inch diameter INOR-8 pipe positioned vertically in the Loop, has a flanged closure that incorporates a frozen-salt seal to prevent contact of molten salt with the conventional metal oval-ring seal. This closure is similar to a slightly larger one that will be used in the molten salt reactor experiment. A seal of this type between graphite and metal was tested previously.

The ETL graphite-container closure is an extension of the 8 inch diameter graphite container with a 20 inch-long tapered plug inside to form an annulus varying from 1/4 inch radial clearance at the lower end to 1/16 inch radial clearance at the upper end. The molten salt reactor experiment closure is 10 inch in diameter and 28 inch long, with gaps of 1/4 and 1/8 inch, respectively. The tapered gap prevents axial movement of frozen salt as the result of surges in salt pressure.

The seal was made and broken three times, and it was leak-tight during 1500 hours of operation. Since gas is trapped in the annulus during filling, either initial evacuation or later over-pressure or venting must be used to force salt into the cooled region. On the ETL closure, the gas was partially vented after the loop was filled.

An interesting observation made while determining the minimum cooling air required for the seal was that when the cooling air flow was reduced below the critical value, the salt plug moved upward however, instead of moving uniformly around its circumference, in which case gas compression would have limited its travel, the salt extended upward in one semi-molten sector that was contained within frozen salt at the edges. This characteristic precludes the use of trapped-gas compression for preventing salt from reaching the metal oval ring unless the entire joint is held at temperatures above the salt melting temperature.

In order to remove as much of the zirconium tetrafluoride from the system as possible, the original flush salt was removed, the freeze valves were purged, and new salt was introduced into the unused drain tank. Salt samples were removed from the pump while in operation and from the drain tanks when the loop was drained. Chemical analyses of the salt samples indicated that the zirconium content was reduced from about 90,000 parts per million at the end of the previous run to 500 to 1600 parts per million. In comparison, dilution of 1 weight %  molten salt reactor experiment fuel salt into the flush salt would result in 945 parts per million zirconium.

An investigation was made of the oxygen pickup in the salt as a result of contact with loop-metal oxides. To simulate the expected condition of reactor components after heat treatment, the INOR-8 loop and container were heated to 1300°F and held for 12 hours with an oxygen-contaminated cover gas. The loop was then filled with flush salt, and samples were taken for oxide analysis. No increase in salt oxygen concentration was detected. This is consistent with the expected increase of less than 1 parts per million based on weight gain of INOR samples that had received similar treatment.

There is considerable scatter in the data from oxygen analyses, but no definite increase of oxide content is detectable. The loop was opened between operating periods at 800 to 1100 hours, but it was purged and held at a low purge-out temperature of 220°F before refilling.

Because the small amount of zirconium in the flush salt is believed to have lowered the oxide solubility to an unknown limit, the salt was treated with hydrogen fluoride to assure oxygen non-saturation before operation with the graphite. The first treatment of 74 hours with hydrogen fluoride removed 42 grams of oxygen, equivalent to 175 parts per million in the salt. Samples taken several days later, however, indicated that the oxygen content had increased to the original level. While awaiting further samples and to cover the possibility of the oxide having precipitated and been relatively inaccessible to the hydrogen fluoride, the treatment was repeated in August. The second hydrogen fluoride treatment lasted 38 and 1 half hours and removed only 9.5 grams, or 40 parts per million, of oxygen from the salt. Although this quantity of oxygen was higher than expected, the actual rate of oxygen removal at the end of the treatment period was approximately 1 out of 10 of the maximum rate near the beginning of the period. If there were oxide solids left in the bottom of the tank, it could mean that the dissolving rate was very low during the 400 hours between treatments. Another source of contamination is a small unknown amount of oxygen that was admitted to the tank during the introduction and removal of the dip tube used in the hydrogen fluoride treatment. Further study will be made of the effect of this source.

The rate of corrosion of the container walls by the hydrogen fluoride was apparently greater than during the treatment performed in the other tanks in November 1961. There was a negligible increase in the salt chromium content during operation of the largely INOR-8 system, which is to be compared with the chromium content increase from 100 to 200 parts per million during hydrogen fluoride treatment of salt in the Inconel drain tank. Considering the amount of tank surface exposed to the salt, the weight of salt treated, and the number of hours of treatment, the removal of chromium is equivalent to 84 hundred thousandths inches total or 11 thousandths of an inch per hour of hydrogen fluoride treatment. The INOR-8 tanks of the molten salt reactor experiment are expected to be more corrosion-resistant.

Some difficulty was experienced during operation of the loop with plugging of the pump off-gas line. Examination after the first 788 hours of operation revealed a collection of salt at the junction of the unbaffled 1 half inch pipe off-gas connection with the DANA pump-bowl lid. Around the baffled gas-inlet line, there was a small, but unobjectionable ridge of salt. A salt deposit that was of concern appeared 6 inches above the liquid level in the capsule stop area of the sampler-enricher guide tube. A buildup there would interfere with the lowering of the sample capsule during testing of the sampler-enricher mockup. Cold fingers were therefore inserted into the gas space above the salt level in the pump and the drain tank to determine whether these deposits were due to mist caused by agitation in the pump or by the vapor pressure of the salt.

A 1/4-inch diameter copper tube sealed at one end was inserted into the pump bowl gas space and positioned 1 inch above the liquid level. The tube was air-cooled internally for a period of 89 hours while the pump was turning at 900 rotations per minute in salt at 1100°F. The salt deposit was distributed uniformly around the circumference. The deposit was examined petrographically and found to be 2 lithium fluoride beryllium fluoride, the composition of the salt mixture being circulated. A similar cold finger was inserted into the quiescent atmosphere of the drain tank on two occasions for periods of 44 and 144 hours at 1200 and 1220 degrees Fahrenheit, respectively. Both tubes had a thin deposit, which was scraped off, examined by x-ray diffraction, and determined to be 90 to 95% beryllium fluoride. The difference in chemical composition and weight of the deposits found in the pump bowl and the drain tank led to the conclusion that the pump bowl difficulties were caused by an aerosol-type dispersion of salt particles.

A cylindrical shield of sheet Inconel was then inserted into the sampler guide tube so that it extended below the liquid level, and a 1 sixteenth inch wide longitudinal slit was positioned away from the pump impeller to prevent liquid salt from being forced up into the shield. Examination of the sampler guide tube again after 740 hours of operation revealed no salt deposit in the capsule stop area.

The ETL graphite, which is the same shape as molten salt reactor experiment graphite except that the pieces are only 50 inch long, was loaded into the ETL graphite container July 13, 1962. The loading consisted of five stringers, complete with INOR-8 lifting knobs, plus 16 other partial elements forming 16 flow channels. Several miscellaneous graphite and metal samples were attached to the graphite hold-down section of the freeze-joint plug. The graphite was dusted with a vacuum brush and weighed before installation.

The container, pump, and loop were then sealed and evacuated at room temperature to 130 micrometers of mercury through liquid-nitrogen-cooled traps for 24 hours. The total weight gain of the cold traps was 10 grams. The system was then pressurized with helium and heated. The container and graphite were held at 1300°F for 9 hours while helium was being circulated by the pump and also purged through a liquid-nitrogen-cooled trap. The weight gain of the trap during this operation was 4.5 grams.

The dry box, described previously, was positioned over the graphite container following the cooldown. After the dry box was evacuated, leak tested, and purged with dried argon, the container was opened and graphite samples were removed for various types of oxygen analysis. The analytical results, as well as the results of analyses of as-received material, will be reported at a future date.

Maintenance of the molten salt reactor experiment will be accomplished, as discussed previously, primarily with semidirect methods. Remote methods will be used for operations which require large openings in the shield and produce radiation levels so high as to preclude occupancy of unshielded areas near the reactor cell. Almost all the in-cell operations will be performed semi-directly with long-handled tools operated through bushed holes in the portable maintenance shield. Viewing will be provided by special lights, windows, and periscopes. Moving shield blocks and large pieces of equipment into or out of the cell will be done remotely from inside the shielded maintenance control room, using the overhead crane system with direct and television monitoring. Design and development of the in-cell equipment, the portable shield, and the maintenance tools and development of the techniques for their use have proceeded simultaneously in order to produce a coordinated system. A procedure that outlines the steps necessary to accomplish a representative maintenance task was prepared.

The freeze-flange clamps will be driven on and off the flanges by hydraulic cylinders mounted in frames on the ends of tubular masts. A framework consisting of an upper and lower beam, two vertical push rods, and two ears welded on the horizontal center line of the flange will remain in the reactor cell attached to the clamps. This framework will serve to center the clamps, to eliminate tilting during disassembly, and to simplify maintenance tools. When the clamps are driven off they will be stored on an installed bracket by a hook-type handling tool.

Flange alignment will be effected by a system of jacks, hooks, and brackets installed in the cell, and each flange will require custom installation. The equipment has been designed, and a prototype system will be built and tested. The long-handled tools for adjusting the system were fabricated.

A tool for replacing gaskets was designed and constructed, and the complete gasket installation procedure was successfully tested. The covers to be placed over open flanges during maintenance were also designed and constructed, and their handling was demonstrated.

A 1.625-inch diameter periscope suitable for reactor use was purchased from the Lerma Company. It will be used in mockup demonstrations. Appropriate sheaths, windows, mirrors, and lights are being designed for use with the periscope.

Design work is nearing completion on a portable maintenance shield to provide the molten salt reactor experiment with a facility for shielded semidirect maintenance operations. The shield is designed to temporarily replace any two adjacent lower roof plugs over the reactor or the drain tank cells. A series of built-in tool access ports provide space for multiple maintenance operations.

The portable shield assembly consists of four basic components: slide, modules, frame, and track. The slide dimensions are 8 and a half or 13 ft long by 5 feet wide and consist of three layers of 4 inch-thick steel plate welded together to a total thickness of 12 inch of shielding. The slide includes a circular cutout that accommodates a 35 inch diameter plug. The plug, in turn, includes a series of small cutouts that provide access for various lights, windows, and tools. Another cutout, at one end of the slide, borders the eccentric plug of an adjacent module attachment, as well as a removable crane access module.

The modules are additional short sections of slide that can be added to the main slide to allow positioning of tool holes above the desired work area. The module adjacent to the slide contains a duplicate of the 35 inch diameter slide plug mounted eccentrically within a 50 inch diameter plug. This plug-within-plug arrangement provides necessary reach to permit tool access over any point within the block opening. The hole layout within the inner plug permits multiple access to the reactor freeze flange, as specifically required for flange maintenance and for optical positioning and alignment. The plugs are manually gear-driven to allow precise positioning of their multiple openings. Pneumatic socket drivers may also be employed for driving the gears. The modules and plugs are fabricated from 12 inch-thick carbon steel.

The frame, constructed of heavy steel plate, serves as the support for the slide. After the frame is installed over a lower roof plug, the slide is moved to an end track to permit the removal of the concrete plug. An opening 52 by 127 inches is provided. The slide is then returned to position over the cell opening to provide complete shielding for personnel. A 3/4 horsepower motor and gear-box combination mounted on the frame moves the slide through a rack-and-pinion arrangement. The rate of travel is about 2 inches per second. Movable end stops are provided to limit travel as desired. Motor controls are connected to the maintenance control room operating station with a cable.

The track is an extension to the frame that can be mounted at either end of the frame and on which the slide and module rollers move. It consists of I-beams with channel and angle bracing.

A shielding thickness of 12 inches of steel is provided throughout. Sufficient shielding is provided to limit radiation levels 24 hours following reactor shutdown to about 10 milli-rads per hour.

As many as eleven 150 watt lighting fixtures can be mounted in special plugs provided in the slide and the modules for special illumination of the work area. All work holes are designed with stepped split inserts to accommodate tools of various diameters. Some inserts include a drilled lead ball through which tools may be swung into positions other than directly underneath the work hole. Three 8 inch diameter lead-glass windows may be mounted simultaneously for direct viewing. Periscope and television camera openings are also available.

Six prototype brazed joints in 1-1/2-inch Schedule 40 INOR-8 pipe were fabricated using tools and equipment developed for this purpose. One joint was made in a mockup of the drain cell with all work accomplished remotely, as it will be done in the molten salt reactor experiment. Another was made on a pipe in which molten salt had been circulated and in which some salt remained. All six joints were subjected to a hydrostatic test, a helium leak test, and ultrasonic inspection. None evidenced any leakage, and all indicated adequate bonding. The development work on the joint and methods for its remote fabrication is considered to be complete. Development work on techniques and equipment for remote inspection is still under way.

A prototype 1-1/2 inch brazed joint was tested in service that simulated a drain line. The joint was held at 1250 degrees Fahrenheit for a total of 6780 hours, including 123 hours in contact with salt and 402 simulated drains. There was no apparent damage to the joint throughout the test. The joint was removed from the loop for metallurgical examination.

The design of the overflow-line disconnect at the fuel pump bowl was completed, and a carbon-steel prototype was built for testing. The disconnect is essentially a ring-joint flange mounted in a vertical line with a cylindrical baffle extending downward into the pipe to trap gas next to the ring gasket.

A series of tests of the prototype at 1OOO°F and 70 thermal cycles, both internally and externally applied heat, indicated favorable temperature distribution and excellent leak tightness. Therefore an improved INOR-8 prototype flanged joint was built and installed in the freeze-valve test loop. Testing with salt is scheduled to start in the near future.

The design of the fuel pump was approved, as previously reported, and fabrication of the pump tank is approximately 30% complete. An INOR-8 volute casting has been weld repaired to the required quality for reactor service, and a spare volute casting is being weld repaired to the same quality. Fabrication of two rotary elements for the fuel pump is approximately 80% complete.

The design of the coolant pump was completed and approved. The coolant and fuel pumps are similar in design, except that the hydraulic characteristics are different and the coolant pump tank does not contain the xenon-removal spray and the cooling shroud for the upper shell of the tank used in the fuel pump.

The fabrication of the pump tank is approximately 30% complete. An INOR-8 volute casting was weld repaired to the quality required for reactor service, and a spare volute casting is being weld repaired to the same quality. The fabrication of two rotary elements for the coolant pump is approximately 80% complete.

The design of the lubrication stands was completed and approved. Two stands will be required, one for the fuel pump and one for the coolant pump. The lubrication systems are designed to lubricate and cool the pump-shaft bearings and seals and to transport heat from the shield plug and the upper tank structure. The two stands will be interconnected to provide time for orderly shutdown of the reactor in the event one of the systems should become inoperative.

Each stand provides a water-cooled reservoir, two centrifugal pumps in parallel, a full-flow oil filter, and the necessary valves and instrumentation to ensure adequate lubrication and cooling of the reactor pumps. The fabrication of the stands is approximately 40% complete.

The test lubrication pump has circulated a turbine type of oil for 5413 hours at 160 degrees Fahrenheit, 70 gallons per minute, and 3500 rotations per minute. Upon resumption of operation after the initial test of 1428 hours, the motor failed after operating an additional 913 hours when one phase of the stator winding became grounded. The stator was replaced and testing was resumed.

The design of the drive motors for the reactor pumps was completed and approved. The basic design consists of a totally enclosed, water-cooled, explosion-proof, NEMA design B, special-purpose, squirrel-cage induction motor. The motor for the fuel pump is rated 75 horsepower at 1200 rotations per minute, and the motor for the coolant pump is rated 75 horsepower at 1800 rotations per minute.

The specification for the drive-motor containment vessels requires that the vessels pass a mass-spectrometer leak test with a helium leak rate of less than 1 x 10 to the power of -8 cubic centimeter per second at standard temperature and pressure. The vessel fabricator has experienced difficulty acquiring acceptable plate material, as a second order of the material failed to pass the impact-test requirements and is being heat-treated prior to retesting.

Fabrication of the prototype pump tank was completed, and the tank was installed in the test facility. Bench testing of the rotary element was completed, and it was installed in the pump tank for elevated temperature testing.

The construction of the test facility was completed. In addition to the prototype pump and loop piping, it includes two freeze flanges, one of which is of the Molten Salt Reactor Experiment design, a section of Molten Salt Reactor Experiment pipe heater, the cooling system for the upper shell of the fuel pump tank, the nozzle for the sampler-enricher, the bubble-type liquid-level devices, and a thermocouple installed in a well for comparison with thermocouples attached to the external surface of the pipe.

Hydraulic performance data were obtained with a 13-inch diameter impeller at 1200°F on three different system resistance lines at speeds ranging from 600 to 1150 rotations per minute. The hydraulic performance of the pump with molten salt compares well with the performance with water. While data were being taken on the last and steepest resistance line, the pump shaft seized along the lower 4 inches of the shield plug.

The seizure, which was of the friction-weld type, was caused by rubbing between the outer surface of the shaft and the surface of the bore in the shield plug. Deflection of the shaft by radial hydraulic force on the impeller had reduced the running clearance to zero just prior to seizure. The pump was operating at an off-design condition well removed from its balance line when the seizure occurred. The pump had operated satisfactorily for 335 hours at 1200°F. Another rotary element is being assembled in which the running clearances are increased to accommodate off-design operation, and the test will be resumed.

The PKP test pump continued to operate and had accumulated a total of 5445 hours at 1225 degrees Fahrenheit, 1950 rotations per minute, and 510 gallons per minute, circulating the salt 65 mole % lithium fluoride 30 mole % beryllium fluoride 4 mole % thorium tetrafluoride 1 mole % uranium tetrafluoride. The differential pressure across the lower shaft seal has been maintained at 1 pounds per square inch. The seal leakage across the upper seal has been approximately 5 cubic centimeters per day, and across the lower seal, it has been too small to measure conveniently.

The test pump with a molten-salt-lubricated bearing was equipped with a new journal and bearing fabricated of INOR-8. During shakedown of the test facility, it was noted that the hot, wetted end of a thermocouple well 3/8 inch diameter tube had corroded away. Operation will be resumed as soon as an analysis of the fuel supply and a metallurgical examination of the remainder of the thermocouple tube have been made.

A prototype model of the two-level conductivity-type liquid-level probe being developed for use in single-point measurement of liquid level in the molten salt reactor experiment storage tanks was constructed. The basic principle of operation of the probe was reported previously; however, the structural design of the probe differs from the conceptual design described previously in that the control sampling access hole and the mounting flange have been eliminated. The changes were necessitated by changes in the design of the storage tanks that precluded the use of the central access hole for level-probe installation. In the revised installation, the probe will be welded into a pipe nipple and will not be removable.

The probe assembly is being tested in molten salt under simulated operating conditions. Initial results of the tests indicate that the design concept is correct. Signals of 100 millivolt amplitude were received when the salt was in contact with the probe. The signal level was less than 20 millivolts when the salt level was below the probe. It is expected that this latter signal level can be reduced by balancing capacities and by use of a phase-sensitive demodulating circuit in the receiving equipment. Testing of the prototype probe will continue in order to determine the long-term reliability of the device and to obtain data for use in the design of the molten salt reactor experiment indicator. Detailed designs of probe assemblies for the molten salt reactor experiment are being prepared.

Developmental testing of a continuous liquid-level-indicating element for use in measurement of molten-salt levels in the Molten Salt Reactor Experiment fuel and coolant pump bowls was continued. A four-month initial test at temperatures between 900 and 1300°F was terminated June 4. During the last three months of this period, the temperature was maintained at 1200°F, and the molten salt was held at a constant level. The maximum variation recorded during this period was 0.1 inch; the span of the instrument is 5 inch. Tests made at the end of the four-month test period revealed no evidence of calibration shift, hysteresis, or other degradation of the performance characteristics of the instrument in excess of 2% of full seal. There has been no indication of buildup of solids as a result of vapor deposition in the core tube of the instrument; however, solid deposits were found on a spark-plug level probe removed from the test stand at the conclusion of the four-month test. After completion of the four-month test, the instrument was drained and the temperature was cycled three times between 500 and 1000°F. Subsequent checks revealed no evidence that the instrument was damaged by this repeated heating and cooling. The instrument was returned to operation at 1200°F, and long-term testing is continuing.

A third instrument is being constructed and will be installed on the Molten Salt Reactor Experiment pump testing facility to obtain experience under operational conditions approximating those which will be encountered in the Molten Salt Reactor Experiment. This instrument will use an INOR-8 metal-ball float, since graphite will not float in the barren salt used in this facility. The transformer will be mounted above the float because this type of assembly is preferred for the Molten Salt Reactor Experiment installation and because tests of a similar unit, described above, revealed no objectionable operational characteristics.

Investigations of single-channel thermocouple alarm switches for use in freeze-flange and freeze-valve monitoring and control systems continued. Several components of the Electra System Corporation monitoring system were received in late March. The system included a dual-limit alarm module, two single-limit alarm modules, a control module, and the power supply and module enclosure.

The units were tested in the laboratory. As previously reported, the single-limit alarm modules appear to be suitable for freeze-flange monitoring. Recent tests indicate that control module is suitable for the valve-monitoring system. The evaluation thus far is based only on laboratory tests.

The Electra System was placed in field operation on a freeze-valve testing facility in mid-August. It is now undergoing full field tests utilizing the control system to be used for the reactor. The Electra System is composed of modular units, as previously described. The top unit is the power supply and the bottom unit the module enclosure.

Tests of the Daystrom Magsense Control Relay, Model A-82, were completed. As previously reported, 22 this unit could be utilized for the flange and valve monitoring systems; however, the individual units would have to be integrated into a system. This would require adding alarm-limit lights, relays, and enclosure, as well as a common power supply. Further, the input resistance of the units is so low that it could cause a problem with long thermocouple leads.

Development work on the mercury-jet-commutator thermocouple-scanning system is continuing. The switch was modified to reduce spurious noise generation. An alarm discriminator was designed and constructed, and the reference-thermocouple isolation system was improved and packaged with the alarm discriminator. A differential direct current amplifier with variable bandwidth was received, and an existing 17 inch oscilloscope was repaired to display the thermocouple signals.

The complete system was assembled and tested in the laboratory in early May. A diagram of the system as it now exists is shown in Figure 18. The laboratory tests with simulated thermocouple signals were successful, and the system was installed on a liquid-level test facility in early August. One hundred thermocouples from the test facility were used as input signals to the scanner. At present, the system continues to operate satisfactorily after more than 700 hours of operation. Operation will be continued to determine the operating life of the mercury switch.

The diagram of the system shows the principle of operation. One hundred thermocouples are switched in sequence by the mercury-jet switch at a rate of 2000 points per second. The output of the switch is fed to an integrating system consisting of a capacitor and the resistance of the de amplifier. The signal level is held during the point-to-point switching time. The reference thermocouple signal is fed to two double-pole double-throw choppers with a capacitor between the poles of each chopper. The reference thermocouple is connected in opposition to the output of the mercury switch. The choppers store the charge from each side of the reference thermocouple during one half of the operating cycle and then switch it across the large integrating capacitors in each output line of the mercury switch. The difference signal is fed to the direct current amplifier and amplified to 1 volt. The output of the amplifier is fed to the oscilloscope and to the alarm discriminator. The alarm discriminator can be adjusted to produce an alarm when the difference signal exceeds an adjustable range of 50 to 300°F. If the reference signal and the commutated signal are equal, a straight line is seen on the oscilloscope. If a signal from one thermocouple is higher than the reference, it is fed through the system as an ac signal and appears as a positive pulse on the oscilloscope. By using a synchronizing pulse from the switch, the 100 thermocouple signals are displayed on the oscilloscope in a fixed position so that each signal is identified with a particular thermocouple.

The switch modification consisted of installing shorting straps between the coalescer coil and the common mercury pool. This reduced the static charges which were generated between the coalescer coil and the mercury pool and resulted in a significant reduction in the spurious noise generated in the switch.

This circuit is designed to produce an alarm when pulse signals having an amplitude of 1 volt or greater and a repetition rate of 20 pulses per second are applied to the input. With proper adjustment of the differential direct current amplifier, the discriminator may be adjusted to produce an alarm with signals as small as 50°F. A pulse-integrating circuit prevents spurious alarms from random noise pulses. Since the mercury scanning switch samples each point 20 times per second, input pulses resulting from a true alarm condition will have a repetition rate of at least 20 pulses per second and an alarm will occur. The discriminator alarm circuitry is completely transistorized and is packaged in a 3 and 1 half inch wide, 7 and 1 half inch high, panel-mounted housing. Also packaged in the housing are the reference-thermocouple isolation system, a sync-pulse amplifier for driving the oscilloscope trigger, and the necessary power-supply circuits.

Testing of mechanical thermocouple attachments for use on radiator tubes in the molten salt reactor experiment was resumed after the test apparatus was modified to eliminate errors in measuring the inner wall temperature. Provisions for purging with inert gas were added; the reference thermocouple was attached to the inner wall of the INOR-8 tube by spot welding and thermal insulation was placed between the thermocouples and the copper slug.

Several test thermocouples were prepared with one section of a two-piece clamp made of 3/16-inch wide, 0.020-inch thick Inconel attached to the sheath near the end seal with gold-nickel brazing alloy. The thermocouples were then attached to the tube by placing the upper section over the tube, engaging the lower section, and crimping both, as shown in

Several tests were run with the thermocouples attached as described above and with thermal insulation consisting of different thicknesses of Fiberfrax board or paper placed over the junction end of the thermocouple. The thermocouple shown is insulated with Fiberfrax paper, and the thermocouple second from right is insulated with Fiberfrax board. The accuracy of the wall-temperature measurements with the test thermocouple was improved considerably with both forms of Fiberfrax insulation. The flexible paper form of Fiberfrax is preferred over the rigid board, however, because it requires no machining or preforming prior to installation. The test thermocouple used in run 5 was covered with Thermom, a heat-conductive cement rated to 1250°F, and three layers of 1/8th inch thick Fiberfrax paper. It is not known yet whether Thermom will be acceptable for this application. A test specimen of a typical thermocouple attachment covered with Thermom is now undergoing a corrosion test.

Eight molten salt reactor experiment-prototype surface mounted thermocouples were installed in the ETL facility to determine, under simulated operating conditions, the reliability of attachments and the accuracy of wall temperature measurements taken with thermocouples located on the walls of pipes and components adjacent to heaters. Sheather, 1/16th inch outer diameter, single-conductor two-wire, and 1/8th inch outer diameter, sheathed, duplex thermocouples were mounted in pairs adjacent to 30-gauge bare-wire reference thermocouples at three locations. A similar pair of thermocouples was located adjacent to a reference thermocouple installed in a well at a fourth location.

All the thermocouples have been in service since April 16, 1962, and are still performing satisfactorily; however, they have accumulated only 1500 hours of operation time at 1040 to 1200 degrees Fahrenheit during this period because of loop downtime. With salt circulating at the above temperatures, differences in readings between the test thermocouples and the respective reference thermocouples, as noted periodically, were inconsistent.

Six Inconel-sheathed magnesium oxide insulated Chromel-Alumel thermocouples are being tested to determine the stability of calibration at molten salt reactor experiment temperatures. Over 5000 hours of soaking time in 1200 to 1250 degrees Fahrenheit air has been accumulated to date. None of the thermocouples have drifted more than 2 degrees Fahrenheit equivalent in electromagnetic field output.

Ten molten salt reactor experiment-prototype wall-mounted thermocouples were installed in the drain-tank bayonet-cooler test facility to determine the effects of fast temperature transients on the life of these thermocouples and to determine how fast they would respond to transients. The thermocouples tested consisted of both 1/16 inch outer diameter, sheathed, single conductor, two-wire and 1/8 inch outer diameter, sheathed, duplex thermocouples with junctions grounded to walls and end seals. One 1/8 inch outer diameter unit failed immediately after startup of the test. Its early failure is thought to have been due to faulty construction, since the other nine units have been subjected to rapid temperature changes between 1200 and 600°F for over a week without failing. The thermocouples that endure the thermal-cycling test will be checked for speed of response.

Six molten salt reactor experiment-prototype wall-mounted thermocouples were installed on a freeze valve in a test conducted to determine the durability of these units in this type of service and to determine the accuracy of the measurement of wall temperature at the cooled and heated area of the valve. Sheathed, 1/16th-inch outer diameter single-conductor and 1/8th-inch outer diameter duplex thermocouples were mounted in pairs adjacent to a 30 gauge bare-wire reference thermocouple at three locations on the valve. The test thermocouples agreed with the reference thermocouples, except that during rapid heating and cooling, differences of 15 to 20°F in temperature readings were noted. All the thermocouples were still functioning after two weeks of intermittent operation of the valve. No significant difference in the performance or durability of the 1/16th-inch single-conductor and 1/8th-inch duplex thermocouples has been noted.

A six-circuit radiation-resistant thermocouple-disconnect assembly was fabricated from commercially available components. This disconnect is simpler in construction than the assembly previously described and is more compatible with molten salt reactor experiment requirements. The plug and jack panels were supplied by the Thermo Electric Company and are similar to their standard plug and jack panel assemblies, except for the insulating material, which is Electropestos. The housings are modified FS-type conduit boxes. The jack housing has a removable back plate to facilitate wiring connections. Swaged-type tube fittings are utilized to support and restrain the individual metal-sheathed thermocouples. A disconnect of this type was tested in the remote-maintenance test facility and operated satisfactorily. Alignment of the pins during remote maintenance operations will be accomplished by means of a guide incorporated in the handling tool.

IN-8 specimens sustained only superficial attack by carbon tetrafluoride vapor in 500 hour tests at 1112 to 1472 degrees Fahrenheit. The presence of both oxide and fluoride reaction products were detected, however, on specimen surfaces examined under the electron microscope and diffraction camera. In order to determine whether these films had effected passivation of the IN-8 surfaces, two additional experiments were run with specimens immersed in a fuel salt of the composition 70 mole % lithium fluoride 23 mole % beryllium fluoride 5 mole % zirconium tetrafluoride 1 mole % thorium tetrafluoride 1 mole % uranium tetrafluoride and with carbon tetrafluoride vapor passed continuously through or over the fluoride salt.

The two experiments were performed in 2-inch diameter isothermal INOR-8 pots at temperatures of 1112°F and 1292°F, respectively. Although both were scheduled for 1000 hours of operation, depletion of the carbon tetrafluoride supply at the higher temperature required termination of this experiment after 700 hours. Specimens being tested at 1112°F were removed from the vessel at 100-hour intervals. The specimens exposed to the salt underwent negligible weight changes and showed no consistent pattern of weight loss or gain; however, specimens tested in the vapor phase exhibited a slight weight increase, in accordance with previous test results. Specimens immersed in salt at 1292°F gained substantial weight, and in some cases a metallic-appearing coating was noted. Analyses of the coating showed it to consist principally of nickel, with relatively large amounts of molybdenum. Specimens in the vapor phase showed small, although consistent, weight losses and were covered with a greenish reaction product.

Metallographic examinations of the specimens tested at 1112°F revealed no evidence of surface changes. Specimens tested at 1292°F were lightly pitted in areas not covered by the metallic coating. Areas covered by the coating were not attacked. Some evidence of carburization could be detected metallographically; however, chemical analyses of the specimens after the test showed no changes in carbon content compared with that of as-received samples.

The results of these and earlier experiments indicate that carbon tetrafluoride vapor is effectively nonreactive toward INOR-8 at 1112°F but that minor attack may be promoted by carbon tetrafluoride in the presence of fluoride salt at 1292°F. At least part of the attack at 1292°F appears to be attributable, however, to hydrolysis of the carbon tetrafluoride by traces of moisture in the system. This conclusion is based on the detection of small amounts of carbon monoxide and carbon dioxide in the gas leaving the test vessel.

A final design and a welding procedure were established for the tube-to-tube sheet joints of the molten salt reactor experiment primary heat exchanger that incorporated modifications of the previous design to provide for inspection of the back-brazed region.

The joint was changed by flaring the weld end sufficiently so that weld rollover would not interfere with the insertion of an ultrasonic inspection probe into the tube.

A test assembly was fabricated to demonstrate suitable fabrication procedures and welding techniques, and to study the effect of size on the back-brazing operation. The assembly contained 96 welded and back-brazed joints. Welding was completed without difficulty, and good flow of braze metal, indicated by filleting, occurred in all but one of the joints. Metallographic investigation of this brazed joint revealed that contamination in the vicinity of the feeder holes had interfered with flow of the alloy. To avoid a similar situation in the molten salt reactor experiment heat exchanger, precautionary inspection measures have been included in the fabrication procedure.

Methods of inspecting tube joints were developed that are applicable to the molten salt reactor experiment heat exchanger. These include radiography of the weldments and an ultrasonic Lamb-wave technique for inspecting the brazed joints.

Test welds were examined with both X-ray and Iridium sources under a variety of conditions, using curved strips of film placed in the tubes at the welds.

Four to six exposures were required to completely inspect each weld; however, the tube arrangement on the molten salt reactor experiment heat exchanger allows for several tube welds to be radiographed at one time, and the operation will be more economical than for the test welds. The defects observed were somewhat distorted because of the method of film placement, but, despite this, pores several thousandths of an inch in diameter were detected.

The ultrasonic Lamb-wave technique developed for the evaluation of bonding in brazed tube joints utilizes a small probe that fits inside 1 half inch diameter tube. The probe contains two piezoelectric crystals that serve as ultrasonic generator and receiver, respectively. The proper ultrasonic frequency and beam incident angles were determined, and a custom probe was designed and fabricated. Approximately 20 brazed joints with various degrees of bonding were evaluated using this system, and metallographic examinations are in progress to provide correlation of the test results.

A mechanical device has been designed to provide for uniform scanning of the probe in the tube, ensuring complete inspection coverage. This device will enable faster inspections and may also allow automatic recording of unbonded areas.

The brazing procedure and equipment described previously for remotely fabricating INOR-8 pipe were used in the preparation of six prototype joints. Evaluation of these by ultrasonic techniques developed previously indicated only minor nonbonding in five of the brazed areas. The sixth joint contained a number of unbonded areas in the upper portion of the braze.

A mechanical properties investigation is being made of INOR-8 weld material from heats to be used in the molten salt reactor experiment. As part of the preliminary studies, data were obtained on the effect of stress-relieving on stress-rupture properties. These initial tests were made using transverse weld specimens cut from a weld-containing base plate and weld wire. Two samples were tested at 1500°F in the as-welded condition and two in the stress-relieved condition. It is evident that the stress-relieving treatment improved the overall properties of the weldment, probably because of a redistribution of microconstituents, such as grain-boundary carbides.

Tests were also performed on welds made with the short-arc semiautomatic welding process. The low ductilities were probably due to defects in the weld. It is expected that improvements in the process can produce welds having properties comparable with those of welds produced by the manual, tungsten-arc process.

The mechanical properties of typical INOR-8 material procured for molten salt reactor experiment construction are being determined in order to evaluate the effects of large-quantity production and improved-quality requirements. Specimens for tensile and stress-rupture testing were prepared from representative INOR-8 plate, including heats N1-5055, N1-5075, and N1-5081. Tensile properties will be tested from room temperature to 1800°F, and stress-rupture properties will be determined in air at 1100, 1300, and 1500 degrees Fahrenheit.

The thermal fatigue properties of INOR-8 are being determined with methods described by Carden. Fifteen tests were completed at maximum test temperatures in the range 1250 to 1600°F and cycle periods of 1 and 10 minutes.

The thermal-fatigue data indicate that Inconel and type 304 stainless steel have greater ability to sustain plastic flow than INOR-8. An analysis of the temperature difference versus cycles to failure for comparable maximum temperatures and frequencies shows, however, that INOR-8 will sustain more restrained thermal cycles and that INOR-8 requires a greater temperature difference than type 304 stainless steel or Inconel to produce failure in a comparable number of cycles. The plastic strain per cycle is less in INOR-8 because of its lower thermal coefficient of expansion and higher elastic strength.

Considerable plastic flow was observed in INOR-8 during the hold time in the 10-minute per cycle test. This phenomenon is being studied for hold times of up to 24 hours.

Specimens of grade TS-281 graphite were evaluated for molten salt and mercury permeation in standard screening tests, and the specimens met  molten salt reactor experiment design requirements. This graphite was produced for the Engineering Test Loop in the size required for the  molten salt reactor experiment and with essentially the same characteristics as those of the graphite for the molten salt reactor experiment.

Exposure of TS-281 test pieces to molten salt resulted in an average salt permeation of 0.2% of the bulk volume. The molten salt reactor experiment specification allows a maximum of 0.5% permeation. Impregnation of similar specimens with mercury resulted in an average weight gain of 1.2%, as compared with a maximum allowable molten salt reactor experiment specification of 3.5%.

A comparison of the permeation of TS-281 graphite with that of experimental grades of similar graphite indicates that full-scale or commercial fabrication imposes the penalty of greater porosity.

In testing the TS-281 specimens, the graphite bars were found to be slightly more porous and less dense toward their central axis; however, these regions were well within the requirements specified for molten salt reactor experiment graphite. Radiographic examinations are being made to determine the distribution of salt impregnation in CGB-Y and 1S-281 graphite.

A determination was made of the effects of temperature on the purging procedure developed to remove oxygen from graphite by utilizing the decomposition products of ammonium bifluoride. The effects of INOR-8 were also examined concurrently.

Grade R-0025 graphite and INOR-8 specimens were exposed isothermally for 20 hours in Inconel containers at temperatures varying from 392 to 1300°F. Both 0.2 and 1.0 gram quantities of ammonium bifluoride were included in the test system.

The following qualitative results were obtained from this study. Both 0.2 and 1.0 grams of ammonium bifluoride effectively removed oxygen contamination from the graphite, except in one instance. The test made with 1.0 grams at 392°F was inconclusive and is being checked. For purges with 0.2 or 1.0 grams of ammonium bifluoride there was a minimum reaction of the INOR-8 specimens at 752°F, as determined by weight gain. In general there was less reaction of INOR-8 at all purging temperatures for the tests with 0.2 grams of ammonium bifluoride than for tests with 1.0 gram. The reaction of INOR-8 varied in proportion to the amount of graphite present and was least in the test with no graphite. This increased attack in the presence of graphite was probably caused by oxygen products available in the graphite.

A study was begun to develop the fabrication procedure necessary to make cylindrical shapes of gadolinium III oxide and gadolinium III oxide aluminum oxide mixtures. These parts are of interest as control rod elements for the molten salt reactor experiment and are being designed to withstand a nitrogen atmosphere contaminated with air and moisture at temperatures up to 1400°F. Aluminum oxide is added to minimize hydrolysis and subsequent deterioration of the gadolinium oxide.

A preliminary test was made of the sintering characteristics of the materials under a single set of conditions. Pellets containing 0%, 20% and 30% weight % aluminum oxide were prepared by dry blending, pressing, and sintering in hydrogen at 1750°F for 3/4 hour. All sintered pieces were set on molybdenum sheet. Of the compositions tested, only gadolinium III oxide gave a sound pellet with good density. The mixtures of gadolinium III oxide and aluminum oxide showed evidence of eutectic melting or the formation of a low-melting-temperature compound that indicated too high a sintering temperature. Additional specimens of gadolinium III oxide aluminum oxide mixtures with various green densities have been prepared and will be fired at 1600, 1650, and 1700 degrees Celsius to determine optimal sintering conditions.

Pellets of gadolinium III oxide with green densities ranging from 2.9 to 3.8 grams per cubic centimeter were tested for determining the effects of green density on sintering characteristics. Shrinkage and bulk density data for these pellets was found. Using this information, thin-wall cylinders having the dimensions required for molten salt reactor experiment control rods will be fabricated for proof testing.

The carbon tetrafluoride found in the cover gas over molten-salt fuel irradiated in graphite crucibles is considered to have formed at the salt-graphite interfaces and to have passed through the graphite to the cover gas. It is postulated that if the carbon tetrafluoride had been forced to pass through molten fuel, it would have been consumed. Two experimental assemblies were designed to test this hypothesis and to study the formation of carbon tetrafluoride.

Six cylindrical INOR-8 capsules, four containing a central graphite core submerged in fuel salt and two containing graphite crucibles, were installed in ORNL MTR assembly 47-4. The capsules were immersed in molten sodium, which served as a heat transfer medium. The primary purpose of the experiment was to determine whether carbon tetrafluoride would exist in the cover gas over molten salt reactor experiment fuel irradiated in contact with completely submerged graphite. Because the fuel could not be maintained molten during reactor scrams and shutdowns, the graphite surface was intermittently in direct contact with the cover gas through cracks in the solid fuel. The crucible capsules, which contained exposed graphite in contact with fuel, provided a basis for comparison with the capsules of the 47-3 experiment and an evaluation of the effectiveness of graphite submersion in preventing the net generation of carbon tetrafluoride. Also, experiment 47-4 provided for a further demonstration of the compatibility of the fuel-graphite-INOR-8 system under thermal conditions at least as severe as those expected to exist during molten salt reactor experiment operation.

The temperature history of the INOR-47-4 capsule during the irradiation period of March 15 to June 4, 1980 was summarized. Four submerged graphite capsules contained central Chromel-Alumel thermocouples. The internal temperature distribution obtained by use of the TOSS computer program indicates that the thermocouple should give essentially the graphite-to-salt interface temperature. The temperature history of the uninstrumented crucible capsules was calculated based on temperature measurements in the surrounding liquid sodium. The maximum measured temperature among the four instrumented capsules was 1400 degrees Fahrenheit plus or minus 50 degrees Fahrenheit. The mean measured temperatures of the other three instrumented capsules were approximately 1380, 1370, and 1310 degrees Fahrenheit, respectively. The corresponding calculated INOR-8 capsule wall-to-salt interface temperatures were 1130, 1125, 1115, and 1110°F. The temperature of the surface of the INOR-3 end cap in contact with the fuel salt was calculated to be the same as that of the graphite-to-salt interface temperature. The area of the end cap wetted by the salt was about 12% of the total 5.6 inch of metal surface in contact with the salt.

The accumulated time during transient operation includes only times for temperature changes of approximately 30°C or more. Of the 121 such temperature changes recorded, 60 included decreases to the solidus temperature of the fuel salt.

The assembly was removed from the MTR, partially disassembled, and returned to ORNL, where it was completely dismantled. Post-irradiation examination of the capsules is in progress. As an aid to interpretation of irradiation effects, an out-of-pile experiment was run that duplicated the temperature history, including the transients.

The 47-5 experimental assembly was designed and constructed to permit gas sampling from two capsules during irradiation to study the carbon tetrafluoride content, if any, of the off-gas from fissioning molten salt reactor experiment fuel in contact with submerged graphite. These capsules are 1 inch in diameter and 2.25 inch long, and they contain a central CGB graphite core 1 half inch in diameter and i inch long submerged approximately 0.3 inch in about 25 grams of fuel. The two capsules differ only in the uranium concentration in the fuel.

Additional capsules included in the assembly are designed to provide a range of oxidation-reduction levels that includes what might be both early and late stages in the life history of a reactor. This is accomplished by altering the accessibility of chromium from the container alloy (INOR-8) to the fuel. These capsules are externally similar to the purged capsules, but the graphite cores are markedly different. A high metal-to-graphite wetted-surface-area ratio of 46 to 1 is obtained by using a central core of INOR-8, except for a 0.1 inch-thick CGB graphite wafer. A low metal-to-graphite surface area ratio of 1 to 4 is obtained by using a close-fitting graphite crucible 0.7 inch in internal diameter and 1.5 inch long, with a central graphite core that is 0.34 inch in diameter and 1 and 1 quarter inch long.

An extreme case in the oxidization study is a capsule with no metal, that is, with graphite pre-permeated with fuel so that the only fuel in the capsule is contained within the pores of an isolated graphite core. Two small capsules of this type are included and will be operated at different power densities. These are 5/8 inch in diameter by 2.25 inches long and contain 0.32 inch diameter by 1 3/4 inches long centrally suspended AGOT graphite cores. Irradiation is scheduled to begin the week of September 17, 1962.

Examinations of irradiated specimens from assembly ORNL-MTR 47-3, the assembly in which carbon tetrafluoride was first detected, provided some additional information on the corrosion products and on the distribution of radioactivity and salt in the graphite. The possibility that much of the carbon tetrafluoride could have been formed from the fluorine released from the frozen salt after shutdown, as found in test 47-4, placed new light on the interpretation of the results of test 47-3. The fuel mixture irradiated in this experiment was initially 69.5 mole % lithium fluoride, 23 mole % beryllium fluoride, 5 mole % zirconium tetrafluoride, 1 mole % thorium tetrafluoride, and 1.5 mole % uranium tetrafluoride.

Corrosion-product analyses were carried out on an aliquot of the solution produced during dissolution of the irradiated fuel to obtain gas samples for reducing-power analyses. The aliquot was evaporated to dryness three times after additions of methanol to remove the excess boric acid used to improve the initial dissolution. The dry residue was dissolved in 10 to 15 milliliters of 9 molar nitric acid with 2 ml of 3 molar hydroxylamine to reduce any hexavalent chromium to the trivalent state, and the thorium was removed from the solution on an anion-exchange column. The solution was then diluted to 5 normal nitric acid, and the uranium was removed by extraction into 20% tributyl phosphate in hexane or Amsco. The iron, chromium, nickel, and molybdenum corrosion products were determined by the intensity of their spectral lines compared with an added internal standard. The readings were made with a densitometer on the photographic plate.

The analyses for corrosion products gave values somewhat different from those previously reported. The corrosion product concentrations that indicate attack on INOR-8 coupons have been revised to the order of 100 parts per million, rather than several hundred or thousand parts per million, and therefore the data for iron, chromium, and nickel indicate mildly reducing conditions. They present some puzzling aspects, however, in that differences are not discernible between capsules that produced widely different amounts of carbon tetrafluoride. This can be explained if the larger amounts of carbon tetrafluoride arose from attack of the graphite by fluorine released after freezing of the fuel.

Another point of interest is the absence of molybdenum in the fuel despite obvious attack on some of the molybdenum coupons. The molybdenum may have volatilized as molybdenum hexafluoride but its presence in a reducing melt would be difficult to reconcile. It would be expected, however, in an atmosphere that would produce xenon tetrafluoride or carbon tetrafluoride. Not finding the molybdenum in the fuel may indicate that it deposited on the wall of the capsule.

The compound xenon tetrafluoride, which was recently discovered at the Argonne National Laboratory, is being studied. As mentioned later in connection with experiment 47-4, there is a close correlation between fluorine or evidence of fluorination in the form of carbon tetrafluoride and a pronounced deficiency of xenon in the irradiated cover gas. This correlation and an observed increase in the xenon-to-krypton ratio in samples collected over a long period of time are circumstantial evidence that xenon tetrafluoride was formed in some capsules. Conversely, the presence of xenon in other capsules is a possible index of the absence of fluorine, at least during the time favorable for reaction with xenon, and this must overlap part of the range in which carbon tetrafluoride is formed. The reaction between xenon and fluorine proceeds at 400 degrees Celsius.

Data on the distribution of radioactivity and salt were obtained from cored samples of graphite parts. Patterns of radioactivity were determined by gamma spectrometry, and the salt distribution was obtained from petrographic studies with an optical microscope. The scatter of the data preclude immediate interpretation, and the data will therefore be held for examination along with data from future similar experiments.

The hypothesis that carbon tetrafluoride should react with the melt rather than accumulating in the cover gas in irradiated capsules containing molten fluoride fuel and submerged graphite was tested further with the irradiation of four capsules, described previously, at a flux of 10 to the power of 13 neutrons per centimeters squared per seconds for more than 1500 hours in the MTR. The data sought in the test, namely the partial pressure of carbon tetrafluoride at operating conditions, were obscured in two of the capsules opened thus far by large amounts of radiolytic fluorine from the frozen fuel. Of the fluorine content in the gas phase, which was 1% of the fluoride in the fuel, some 80% was free fluorine and the remaining 20% was carbon tetrafluoride, most of which probably was a secondary reaction product arising from attack on the graphite by the fluorine released by radiolysis after shutdown.

Two smaller capsules containing molten salt in graphite crucibles were irradiated in the same assembly and received similar neutron dosages and heating cycles. These capsules were also described previously. These two capsules were included in the assembly to provide conditions favorable for the accumulation of a measurable steady-state concentration of carbon tetrafluoride at two power densities one capsule contained twice as much uranium tetrafluoride as the other capsule. The one capsule opened thus far operated at a slightly lower power density than the other because of its location. No fluorine and only the modest amount of carbon tetrafluoride for this type of configuration were found.

Fluorine atoms are undoubtedly formed in fissioning fuel at an appreciable rate as a result of radiolysis. The rate of formation is probably proportional to the power density. The lack of corrosion of metal or graphite indicates that rapid reverse reactions in the molten fuel consume the fluorine atoms and lower the steady-state concentration of elemental fluorine to negligible levels. All other chemical components in the operating fuel system, including moderator and container, remain at virtual thermodynamic equilibrium as long as the fissioning fuel is molten.

As shown by some of the results described below, restricted mobility in the frozen crystals of fuel, along with the pronounced drop in temperatures that prevails in irradiation test capsules after reactor shutdown, may, on occasion, lead to off-equilibrium conditions in the form of excessive amounts of unreacted elemental fluorine. In such cases, the reverse reaction mechanisms that consume fluorine are even more drastically curtailed on shutdown than is the rate of energy release that gives rise to fluorine atoms. The resulting buildup of fluorine molecules in the frozen capsule contrasts markedly with the situation at operating conditions.

Also, the marked contrast between various frozen samples implies that small differences in geometry or freezing history may be of controlling importance. Not all freezing liberates fluorine. Further, there does not seem to have been a significant amount of fluorine formed in the 30 freezings that occurred during the in-pile exposure, probably because of an insufficient time lapse in some cases. Also, there were capsules in which no fluorine was found even after the final lengthy cooling period. The question of why some capsules did and some did not contain fluorine can be answered only conjecturally on the basis of current information.

The capsules were constructed of 1/16 inch wall INOR-8 tubing. The larger type contained 25 grams of fuel consisting of 70 mole % lithium fluoride, 23.3 mole % beryllium fluoride, 5 mole % zirconium tetrafluoride, 1 mole % thorium tetrafluoride, and 0.7 mole % uranium tetrafluoride. The capsules were filled by liquid transfer to a level controlled by blowing excess fuel pack through the dip leg associated with the vent line. Somewhat less than the design volume of 3.5 cubic centimeters of vapor space at temperature probably remained in the capsule, perhaps because of capillary effects. Because of contraction of the fuel, principally on freezing, there was 2.5 cubic centimeters more vapor space at room temperature than at the operating temperature. The room-temperature volumes, as calibrated with known volumes after puncture and gas collection, were about 4.5 cubic centimeters. Initially two concentrations of uranium tetrafluoride were to be used in pairs of the large capsules, but breakage of a transfer line during filling, attributed to embrittlement by sulfur from an unknown source, eliminated the possibility of meeting schedules with the more concentrated fuel.

The smaller capsules were loaded with molded ingots of about 10 grams of fuel contained in graphite crucibles or liners, and in one of them the uranium tetrafluoride concentration was increased to 1.4 mole % to provide a power density of about 160 watts per cubic centimeter. The cover-gas space had a volume of about 2 cubic centimeters. There were no thermocouples in these capsules, and the fuel should not have been in contact with any metal, although traces of solvent probably distilled to the interface between the graphite liner and the INOR-8 capsule wall.

The metal capsule parts were cleaned by firing in hydrogen gas at 1000°C, but a vacuum of questionable quality was inadvertently imposed while the parts were still at temperature. The resulting contamination by air caused a greenish oxide film on the INOR-8 parts, but time for another treatment had elapsed before the error was noted. The film was partially removed with steel wool prior to assembling and welding the parts in a helium-filled glove box. The graphite core in capsule 24 was cleaned by heating to 2000°C in an evacuated system. The graphite parts in the other capsules were cleaned by flushing with a molten fluoride salt.

The larger capsules were then connected with a filling system and heated. The molten fuel salt was run into each capsule and the excess blown back with helium pressure. The fuel salt level was monitored with a television x-ray system. Final closure was made in a glove box where the external ends of the fill tubes were crimped and welded shut.

The results of ionic analyses of the bulk constituents and analyses of the corrosion products of the two fuels prepared for use in experiment ORNL-MTR assembly 47-4 were compiled. The fuel salt was pretreated at 750 to 800 degrees Celsius by sparging for 2 hours with hydrogen gas and then for 8 hours with a 5 to 1 hydrogen gas to hydrogen fluoride gas mixture, followed with a 48 hour sparge with hydrogen gas.

The CGB graphite used in experiment 47-4 had a surface area of 0.71 square meters per gram, as determined by the Brunauer–Emmett–Teller method.

A semiquantitative spectrographic analysis of the graphite revealed only the usual low levels of trace elements, some of which may have been introduced to the specimens during the various machining and handling operations.

The fuel salt froze within 5 minutes after the reactor shutdown that terminated the irradiation of assembly 47-4. Calculations of the decay energy in the large capsules indicated that during the first hour period following the initial 5 minute freezing period about 10 watt hours of energy was dissipated, whereas during normal irradiation about 810 watts was dissipated.

Differences in flux for the various capsules were due to the flux gradient in the beam hole at the MTR. The values for the thermal flux were obtained from the activation of cobalt 60 in the stainless steel wires that were used as dosimeters, and were confirmed by counting chromium 51. They apply to 1553 hours during the period from March 12 to June 4, 1962. The flux was determined on both the exposed and the shaded side of the capsule, but only averaged values are tabulated. These values are higher than the design figures, and the gradient is twice the design value. If these data are correct, the burnup in the capsules varied over a threefold range. No explanation has been found for the discrepancy between these values and the design estimates, which are more consistent with heat transfer calculations.

The temperatures were controlled from capsule 24, and the changes in the retractor position required to hold a constant temperature were not unusual. The thermocouple reading for capsule 45 appeared to drift downward by about 35°C during the 12-week exposure, but this was the only symptom of deviant temperature recordings.

Yields of long-lived and stable isotopes of krypton and xenon, respectively, were about 4% and 21%, or 0.038 and 0.2 cubic centimeters for 1% burnup of 1 gram of uranium 235. Thus the expected yields in capsule 6 were about 0.05% and 0.3 cubic centimeters, and in capsules 24 and 36, 0.27% and 1.4 cubic centimeters.

The capsules were punctured in ORNL's Building 4501 hot cells on a flat surface previously machined for the purpose. A screw-driven puncturing tool was sealed by a bellows and, at the flat surface, by a Neoprene O-ring. Gas escaped into a calibrated collection system that had been evacuated and leak checked. A Toeppler pump was used to transfer gases collected at low pressures. Analyses were made by mass spectrometry for samples containing fluorine at K-25.

The volume of helium and argon was only one half the free volume of irradiated capsule 6. This could have resulted from an effective temperature of 300°C during welding. The amounts of xenon and krypton are in agreement with the calculated yield. This may mean that xenon tetrafluoride was absent from the capsule, no fluorine gas was present, or that the carbon tetrafluoride pressure in this capsule was representative of that to be expected in the graphite at operating conditions. If so, the carbon tetrafluoride pressure was around 120 millimeters of mercury at 715°C.

The data for control capsule 5 indicate that there was very little leakage of air during sampling of capsule 5. The volumes of helium and argon are in reasonable agreement with the values obtained for capsule 6. The high temperature of the capsule during welding seems to be a reasonable explanation for the small volume of those gases.

When irradiated capsule 24 was punctured, 84 cubic centimeters of gas were collected at standard temperature and pressure. This amount was corrected for the amount that reacted with the mercury in the Toeppler pump and developed a black scum identified by x-ray as mercury fluoride. The gas was later identified as predominantly fluorine gas. Since the collection system was not designed for a reactive gas, an appreciable amount of fluorine gas must have been lost to the metallic parts of the system. The remainder reacted with glass to give silicon tetrafluoride and oxygen gas and with other oxides to give oxygen gas. Studies of the gas were hampered by the presence of an excessive amount of tellurium 129 activity. The free volume of capsule 24 at room temperature was 4.6 cubic centimeters, based on the pressure change when helium was expanded into the capsule from a known volume.

Based on mass spectrometry of two O.1 cubic centimeter samples, the 84 cubic centimeters of gas was 5 % helium, 0.1% xenon, 0.4% krypton, 4% carbon monoxide and nitrogen gas, 6% carbon dioxide, and 17 % carbon tetrafluoride. The remainder was oxygen gas and silicon tetrafluoride in roughly equal amounts, matching the products of the reaction, silicon dioxide and 2 parts fluorine gas to produce lithium tetrafluoride and oxygen gas.

Portions of gas were collected under a variety of conditions. The krypton yield listed above is in fair agreement with the calculated value, but the xenon yield is far too low. Later samples, obtained after long exposure of the capsule to an evacuated 3-liter container, had 0.3 cubic centimeters of xenon and less than one-tenth that amount of krypton. This, like other cases of unexplained holdup of xenon, seems now to be associated with the presence of crystalline xenon tetrafluoride.

The carbon tetrafluoride content, approximately 15 cubic centimeters, would have corresponded to a partial pressure of nearly 20 atmospheres had it been present at operating temperature; this is higher by a factor of 100 than found in capsules that yielded no evidence of free fluorine.

Capsule 24 was sawed open to reveal a longitudinal cross section. No damage or evidence of corrosion was visible under low magnification. Petrographic samples from random locations were in general too fine grained to be identified. One sample from near the graphite near the center of the capsule was clearly recognized to contain the normal phases and to have green uranium ions in the 7 lithium fluoride 6 uranium tetrafluoride or 6 thorium tetrafluoride solid solution. This means that the fluoride deficiency in the salt was shared randomly, as expected, for loss of fluorine from the frozen state but not for loss from the liquid state.

Gamma spectrometry of the samples chosen for petrographic examination revealed a preponderance of ruthenium toward the lower part of the fuel when compared with the zirconium-niobium activity that is generally assumed to be uniformly dispersed with the zirconium tetrafluoride in the fuel. Cerium activity was fairly evenly distributed with the zirconium-niobium throughout the fuel, and cesium, along with zirconium-niobium, was found on metal surfaces exposed to the gas phase.

The analyses of the gas from irradiated capsule 36, a duplicate of capsule 24, are more directly representative of the contents of the capsule because an essentially all-metal collection system, comprised largely of pre-fluorinated nickel, was used to transfer and hold the samples, and because a surplus of sample was available for mass spectrometry. Also, the analysis was made promptly. This is pertinent because samples allowed to sit in incompletely conditioned apparatus showed evidence of reaction of fluorine.

The quantity of fluorine was too great to have been present at operating temperatures. The amount of carbon tetrafluoride agrees well with that found in duplicate capsule 24. Also, the xenon appears to have been held up, as if by xenon tetrafluoride, while the krypton is present in roughly the expected yield.

The gamma spectrometer detected Kr-89 in the gas from capsule 36, but no other activity through the nickel walls of the sample containers used. Efforts to improve this analysis are ongoing.

An attempt was made to remove the contents of capsule 36 by melting them under an inert atmosphere, in a manner suitable for chemical analysis and, in particular, for a determination of the reducing power that is expected as a consequence of the loss of fluorine. An apparatus for accomplishing such a sequence of operation in a hot cell worked well with capsule 3A, an unirradiated control sample, but at first appeared to have given satisfactory results with capsule 36. The melting-out operation yielded only about half the capsule contents, and the melted-out salt was green. This might be explained by segregation of the reduced products in the high-melting heel.

Capsule 3A, which was an unirradiated control for Capsules 24 and 36, was subjected to thermal cycles similar to those in-pile. It was punctured and 4.5 cubic centimeters of standard temperature and pressure helium gas were collected. The remainder of the gas was 0.05% carbon monoxide and neon and 0.02% carbon dioxide. The absence of argon and the presence of 1 atmosphere of helium may be explained by the fact that final closure involved welding crimped capillary tubes.

Experimental evidence from previous in-pile tests lends confidence to the view that high-pressure fluorine is not generated by molten fissioning fuel. There is no evidence of severe corrosion on metal exposed to the gas phase above fissioning fuel or on metal wet by fuel. Likewise, no severe damage was observed in similarly exposed graphite.

More fluorine was found than should have been produced by the decay energy liberated during the 5 minutes required for cooling to essentially room temperature. When the reactor was shut down, the power produced in capsules 24 and 36 dropped from 840 watts to 14 watts in 5 minutes, 7 watts in 1 hour, 1.6 watts in 100 hr, and 0.19 watts in 95 days. Assuming that half of the energy released during a 95-day cooling period was absorbed in the fuel, a G value of only 0.035 would have been required to produce fluorine found in capsule 36.

No final choice of a theory explaining why fluorine is not always observed can be made. A difference in crystallization behavior is a possibility. The results from capsules 24 and 36 are probably quite anomalous in comparison with anything that has been seen before in earlier experiments. They point to a problem that requires attention but which does not appear to be a serious threat to the integrity of the molten salt reactor experiment.

The proposed simplification of the molten salt reactor experiment fuel mixture by the omission of thorium tetrafluoride led to a more detailed study of the ternary system lithium fluoride beryllium fluoride zirconium tetrafluoride, with a view toward prescribing suitable solvents to contain the 0.15 mole % uranium tetrafluoride now needed for criticality. The phase diagram of the solvent system did not change significantly, but new information on liquidus contours within the system established the peritectic point involving the solid phases lithium fluoride, 6 lithium fluoride beryllium fluoride zirconium tetrafluoride, and 2 lithium fluoride beryllium fluoride at a composition of 67 mole % lithium fluoride 29.5 mole % beryllium fluoride 3.5 mole % zirconium fluoride and at 445 degrees Celsius. Also, better information on the temperatures along the boundary curve separating the primary phase fields of 6 lithium fluoride beryllium fluoride zirconium tetrafluoride and lithium fluoride was obtained.

A minor surprise, in view of the rather unrestricted interchangeability of the quadrivalent cations zirconium tetrafluoride, thorium tetrafluoride, and uranium tetrafluoride, in the 10 to 15 mole % tetrafluoride compound concentration range, was found in the fact that 7 mole % zirconium tetrafluoride gives a liquidus 25 degrees Celsius higher than that of the 5 mole % zirconium tetrafluoride 1 mole % thorium tetrafluoride 1 mole % uranium tetrafluoride mixture when the remainder of the composition is 70 mole % lithium fluoride and 23 mole % beryllium fluoride, as in the fuel that was nominally 70 mole % lithium fluoride 23 mole % beryllium fluoride 5 mole % zirconium tetrafluoride 1 mole % thorium tetrafluoride 1 mole % uranium tetrafluoride. Such a large change in liquidus temperature, or more specifically, in the freezing-point depression of lithium fluoride, for a change in composition of only 2 mole % is unusual in fluoride fuel mixtures and hence provides an interesting point for further analysis from the standpoint of the thermodynamics of solutions.

One of the specifications for the fuel was a melting point below 450°C so that the fuel would not freeze before the coolant. Since the 0.15 mole % uranium tetrafluoride in the fuel was expected to cause only a slight lowering of the liquidus, the fuel solvent was selected from the 450°C contour in the lithium fluoride beryllium fluoride zirconium tetrafluoride ternary system. The maximum lithium fluoride content occurs, in terms of the nearest whole numbers, near 67 mole % lithium fluoride, 29 mole % beryllium fluoride, and 4 mole % zirconium tetrafluoride. Since both the vapor pressure and the viscosity should decrease as the lithium fluoride concentration increases, this composition region is of interest as a fuel solvent.

The mixture 66.85 mole % lithium fluoride, 29 mole % beryllium fluoride, 4 mole % zirconium tetrafluoride, and 0.15 mole % uranium tetrafluoride, with an estimated melting point of 445°C, was therefore selected for particular study. The obtuse corner in the 450°C contour marks the change from lithium fluoride as a primary phase to 6 lithium fluoride beryllium fluoride zirconium tetrafluoride, and for the fuel composition designated above the primary phase is expected to be 6 lithium fluoride beryllium fluoride zirconium tetrafluoride. Whether significant differences can be detected between liquids such as this is conjectural, but a richer zirconium tetrafluoride content may prove advantageous in increasing the oxide tolerance of the fuel and in giving a primary phase that would be easier to melt than lithium fluoride in case of accidental plugging by partial freezing.

Samples of compositions in the lithium fluoride beryllium fluoride zirconium tetrafluoride system that contain more than 60% beryllium fluoride and hence are too viscous to be of present interest as fuels were quenched from temperatures above the liquidus. The quenched samples consisted of two amorphous materials of distinctly different indices of refraction, as if two glass phases of different composition were simultaneously present. If this implication is borne out, the first instance of liquid-liquid immiscibility in fluoride melts will have been encountered.

Studies pertaining to concentrated solutions for fuel makeup and segregation in the quinary system that includes thorium tetrafluoride in molten salt reactor experiment fuels were nearing completion at approximately the same time that it was proposed that the inconvenience of carrying token amounts of thorium tetrafluoride could be avoided. The conclusions from these investigations are applicable, in a representative fashion at least, to fuels from the quaternary system that do not contain thorium tetrafluoride and are therefore presented in the next two sections as examples of the type of behavior that can be expected.

One means considered for fueling the molten salt reactor experiment included an initial nonnuclear operation with a solvent mixture followed by conversion to the fuel composition 70 mole % lithium fluoride, 23 mole % beryllium fluoride, 5 mole % zirconium tetrafluoride, 1 mole % thorium tetrafluoride, and 1 mole % uranium tetrafluoride by titrating to criticality with the liquid lithium fluoride-uranium tetrafluoride eutectic mixture. It was also proposed that the fuel makeup salt be added as the frozen lithium fluoride-uranium tetrafluoride eutectic mixture. A study of the phase behavior and characteristics of the composition section that gives all possible combinations of solvent and concentrate shows that the melting temperature of the lithium fluoride-uranium tetrafluoride mixture is higher than that of any intermediate composition formed during fueling, that at least four crystalline compounds appear as primary phases at various intermediate compositions, and that uranium and thorium crystallize together in a single solid-solution phase. From the phase relationships observed in this composition section it appears that the lithium fluoride-uranium tetrafluoride eutectic mixture should serve as a suitable fueling mixture for the molten salt reactor experiment. At decreasing concentrations of uranium tetrafluoride, uranium-containing phases precipitate later in the crystallizing sequence. In the fuel itself, the uranium compound 7 lithium fluoride 6 uranium or thorium tetrafluoride precipitates as the tertiary phase, and solids that do not contain uranium tetrafluoride are formed during crystallization of the primary and secondary phases.

An assumed sequence of equilibrium fractionations in the freezing of the five-component molten salt reactor experiment fuel mixture 70 mole % lithium fluoride, 23 mole % beryllium fluoride, 5 mole % zirconium tetrafluoride, 1 mole % thorium tetrafluoride, and 1 mole % uranium tetrafluoride was studied by quenching tests to provide information regarding the fraction of zirconium tetrafluoride remaining in the liquid state at the onset of crystallization of phases containing uranium tetrafluoride and whether this zirconium tetrafluoride concentration was adequate for protection against precipitation of uranium dioxide, the concentration of uranium in the crystalline equilibrium phases within which it is contained during freezing, and the relative position of these phases in the sequence of crystallization reactions, and the approximate concentration of beryllium fluoride in the liquid remaining at temperatures just above the solidus.

Although only an exploratory study of the freezing reactions was made, some qualitative statements regarding the crystallization are warranted. During freezing, the zirconium tetrafluoride concentration in the liquid fraction of the mixture is reduced as the primary and secondary phases are formed, while the uranium tetrafluoride concentration within the liquid is increased and the zirconium-to-uranium concentration ratio is decreased. The limit of protection can be exceeded.

The apparent solidus temperature for the five-component mixture is 429°C. Comparison with solidus values in the limiting lithium fluoride beryllium fluoride tetrafluoride compound systems implies that the composition of the five-component liquid at the solidus consists of no more than 40 mole % beryllium fluoride. The relatively short temperature interval required for complete freezing is not conducive to extensive segregation or to a large difference in the average composition of the initial and final residual liquids. Hence the products of crystallization do not contain so much free beryllium fluoride that the cooled fuel mixture should be expected to be very hygroscopic. The last solid phase observed on freezing the fuel mixture is 7 lithium fluoride 6 uranium or thorium tetrafluoride, which contains 14.4 mole % uranium tetrafluoride. The proportion of uranium tetrafluoride was determined by two independent methods by calculation of the material balance and from measurements of the refractive indices of the solid solution. Three non-hygroscopic solid phases were found in melts cooled under equilibrium conditions: 6 lithium fluoride beryllium fluoride zirconium tetrafluoride, 2 lithium fluoride beryllium fluoride, and 7 lithium fluoride 6 uranium or thorium tetrafluoride. It is to be noted that specimens obtained from a variety of experiments and experimental engineering tests, in which equilibrium cooling did not occur, often contain 3 lithium fluoride zirconium tetrafluoride, 2 lithium fluoride zirconium tetrafluoride, 2 lithium fluoride beryllium fluoride, and 7 lithium fluoride 6 uranium or thorium tetrafluoride, rather than the equilibrium solids.

Crystals of the congruently melting compound CsZrF4 were isolated during the investigation of phase equilibria in the CsZrF4-ZrF4 system.

The compound indium trifluoride which was prepared for use in molten-salt cryoscopy studies, crystallized with the same type of structure as ferric fluoride and several other transition-metal trifluorides. The crystal density is 4.64 g/cm cubed.

The crystal structures of lithium rubidium trifluoride and lithium cesium difluoride were found to be isomorphous. In each crystal, the lithium ions are surrounded by tetrahedra of fluoride ions, and these tetrahedra share corners and edges in such a manner as to form continuous sheets. The rubidium and cesium ions are situated between the sheets and bind them together.

The equilibrium inversion temperature for pure sodium yttrium tetrafluoride crystals inverting from the high-temperature fluorite form to the low-temperature hexagonal form is 691°C. During continuing investigations of the phase relationships in the system sodium fluoride yttrium trifluoride, it was discovered that at nearly saturating concentrations of yttrium trifluoride in the fluorite cubic solid solution, sodium yttrium tetrafluoride yttrium trifluoride solid solutions consisting of approximately 65 mole % yttrium trifluoride appear as equilibrium phases to temperatures below 475°C. Hence the cubic form of sodium yttrium tetrafluoride is stabilized against inversion to the low-temperature form to the extent of approximately 15°C for each mole percent of dissolved yttrium trifluoride.

A marked decrease in the corrosion of grade-A nickel containers used for the hydrogen fluoride dehydration of molten lithium fluoride was achieved by using a hydrogen atmosphere at all times when heat is applied. Previously, lithium fluoride intended for the production of ultrapure crystals was melted under a helium atmosphere and dehydrated with a mixture of helium gas and hydrogen fluoride. Under these conditions, both discolored and clear lithium fluoride was produced. The discolored areas contained the impurities found in grade-A nickel, such as copper, iron, manganese, and silicon, as well as nickel, in the 1000 parts per million range. Material produced using a hydrogen atmosphere throughout did not contain discolored areas. No copper, iron, silicon, or nickel was detected by emission spectroscopy. Only 10 parts per million manganese was found, and the total impurity was less than 300 parts per million.

The density of the proposed molten salt reactor experiment fuel was determined by measuring the buoyancy of a platinum plummet suspended in the melt. The volume of the plummet, corrected for temperature effects, was known to within 0.1%, and the change in weight of about 2.5 grams could be measured to within 1 milligram. The fuel was prepared in a 200-gram batch and purified by treatment with 40 grams of ammonium bifluoride to remove oxide and hydrolysis products. Temperatures were measured using a calibrated platinum/rhodium thermocouple in a well that projected downward into the melt from the side at an angle. The thermocouple was calibrated at the National Bureau of Standards.

A stirrer was operated manually to ensure that the salt melt was initially uniform and was not used further. Protection from the atmosphere was maintained by flowing argon. The data for 66.85 mole % lithium fluoride, 29 mole % beryllium fluoride, 4 mole % zirconium tetrafluoride, and 0.15 mole % uranium tetrafluoride fell on the straight line.

At 663°C, the fuel temperature at the outlet of the core is 2.147 grams per cubic centimeter. Unexplained behavior indicating that the plummet and stirrer had frozen in place was noted at 542°C, approximately 100°C above the melting point. Points obtained at higher temperatures both before and after the sticking effect was noted fell on the same straight line. Subsequent petrographic examination of the fuel disclosed no deposits of oxide, so the data were tentatively accepted as valid. Further checks to establish this point are in progress.

Densities of many molten fluoride mixtures, especially those of molten salt reactor experiment importance, can now be estimated to within 3%. The method involves, first, calculating the molar volumes of the mixture at 600 and 800°C.

The average molecular weight of the mixture is then divided by the molar volumes at 600 and 800°C to obtain the density. Assuming that density is linear with temperature, within the range of interest, the density can be found.

Since the unclad graphite moderator of the molten salt reactor experiment is a possible source of oxide contamination that could conceivably cause zirconium dioxide to form in the fuel salt mixture, treatments that favor the removal of adsorbed gases from the moderator are included in the initial startup sequence. Some desorption is expected when the reactor core is heated to about 650°C in an atmosphere of flowing helium, and more can occur when a barren fluoride salt mixture is circulated for prenuclear testing. Accordingly, an investigation of the characteristics of gas evolution from graphite under conditions simulating these startup operations is in progress.

The experimental program was divided into two parts. In one set of experiments, gas evolution from graphite blocks placed in a circulating stream of helium at 650°C is being studied. The second part of this program is concerned with the removal of adsorbed gases from graphite immersed in a molten-fluoride mixture.

Initially, the reactor core of the molten salt reactor experiment will be heated to about 650°C at a maximum rate of approximately 30°C per hour while preheated helium is circulated through the core at about 75 liters per second. Accordingly, pieces of graphite were canned in a manner that provided the same cross-sectional configuration for flow as an molten salt reactor experiment moderator element, and gas entry and exit ports were provided at either end. This assembly was mounted vertically in a tube furnace as part of the circuit of a gas-circulating loop. The loop was constructed so that portions of the gas stream emerging from the graphite block could be diverted to a system for collection and analysis of gaseous fission products. The circulated gas stream was passed through a magnesium perchlorate drying column and a cold trap to remove moisture. Based on a uniform gas velocity through the molten salt reactor experiment reactor core, a flow rate of about 2.5 liters per minute through the experimental loop was assumed to approximate gas purge conditions around each moderator element. A simple programming device was used to control temperatures.

The data on evolution of moisture from a block of AGOT graphite and from an as-received piece of ETL graphite was presented. The predominant characteristics of the gas evolution were the removal of physically absorbed moisture at temperatures below 100°C and the removal of chemisorbed moisture over the temperature interval 200 to 400°C. The additional amount removed between 400 and 600°C should be relatively inconsequential to reactor operations. In several experiments, AGOT graphite specimens were pretreated with water vapor by circulating moist helium through the loop. The data from subsequent degassing provide further illustration of the characteristic bimodal behavior.

Data on evolution of other gaseous impurities from AGOT graphite, as determined spectroscopically. Since no purification train, except for moisture removal, was included in the helium circuit, these data demonstrate the accumulation and recombination of impurities in the system and thus are not directly applicable to the molten salt reactor experiment startup conditions.

Experiments are in progress to study various gas flow rates and thermal conditions. Also, the removal of air and carbonaceous gases will be followed under conditions that better simulate molten salt reactor experiment operations, and the results will be compared with data obtained by other experimental techniques.

When the primary circuit of the molten salt reactor experiment is filled with the barren fluoride mixture for pre-nuclear test operations, additional adsorbed gas may be released from the unclad graphite moderator. Also, the salt mixture is expected to remove the oxide film from INOR-8 and to permit this source of fuel contamination to be flushed from the system. A laboratory demonstration was attempted in the following manner. When the primary circuit of the molten salt reactor experiment is filled with the barren fluoride mixture for pre-nuclear test operations, additional adsorbed gas may be released from the unclad graphite moderator. Also, the salt mixture is expected to remove the oxide film from INOR-8 and to permit this source of fuel contamination to be flushed from the system. A laboratory demonstration was attempted in the following manner.

An experimental flux salt, 66 mole % lithium fluoride and 34 mole % beryllium fluoride, was prepared in a copper container by conventional techniques. Treatment with hydrogen fluoride and hydrogen continued until the analyzed oxide content of the melt was less than 200 parts per million. A portion of this melt was transferred into a closed vessel of INOR-8 alloy that contained graphite, as described below. A connecting gas manifold permitted a known volume of helium to be circulated over the melt and sampled for spectrographic analysis. Provisions were made to sample the melt periodically without serious alteration of the gas-phase constituents.

Simulation of reactor conditions was based on duplication of the ratio of salt volume to graphite volume and the ratio of graphite surface areas. Right circular cylinders of AGOT graphite, 2, 1, and 1.5 inches in diameter, were held in a positioning rack that was submerged in the molten-salt mixture. Agitation was achieved by slowly revolving the graphite holder.

The experimental data obtained thus far in this program are shown graphically. A possible conclusion from these results is that the evolution of gas from the graphite should be of little consequence to molten salt reactor experiment operations. Only a few tenths of a cubic centimeter of carbon monoxide escapes into gas space per 100 cubic centimeters of graphite per 100 hours, and there is little effect on the oxide content of the salt. The initial rapid rise in oxide content resembles, qualitatively, the expected dissolution of oxide scale from the INOR-8, but in general the values for oxide content are puzzling.

Additional attempts to measure the solubility of carbon tetrafluoride in molten salt reactor experiment melts brought the total to three experiments at 600°C and two experiments at 800°C in which the solubility was apparently below the limit of detection of about 10 to the power of -8 moles of carbon tetrafluoride per cubic centimeter of melt per atmosphere. The experimental equipment, described previously, was recalibrated with argon, and the data were found to be in agreement with earlier measurements with that gas. Analyses by mass spectrometry of a mixture of carbon tetrafluoride and helium that was recirculated continuously at 700 or 800°C through 70 mole % lithium fluoride 23 mole % beryllium fluoride 5 mole % zirconium tetrafluoride 1 mole % thorium tetrafluoride 1 mole % uranium tetrafluoride to which uranium turnings had been added indicated a slow loss of carbon tetrafluoride at 700°C that reached a rate of, perhaps, 4% per day at 800°C. Enough uranium had been added to convert 20% of the uranium in the melt to uranium trifluoride, but, for reasons not fully understood, analyses for determining the reducing power of the melt gave consistently negative results, that is, less than 0.1 weight % uranium ions. The experiment was interrupted by trouble with a gas line before the rate of reaction at 800°C could be established with certainty.

In static experiments at 700°C involving 15 grams of 66 mole % lithium fluoride 34 mole % beryllium fluoride containing 1.45 wt % uranium ions, no evidence of reaction of carbon tetrafluoride with the melt was found when a one-third excess of carbon tetrafluoride was used in the cover gas during three trials in a 155 cubic centimeters reaction vessel. The possibility that carbon tetrafluoride might react metathetically with oxides at 600°C was also investigated, but the results were inconclusive.

In experiments now being prepared, carbon tetrafluoride will be brought into contact with a reduced melt at a graphite interface to see whether the rate of reaction will increase, and an attempt will be made to measure the hydrolysis rate of carbon tetrafluoride.

Work continued on the determination of oxygen in salt mixtures by the inert-gas carbon-reduction method. A graphite crucible tapped to accept a threaded plug that, in turn, screws onto a graphite spindle is used to contain the salt. The plugged capsule facilitates the loading of the sample within the dry box and subsequent rapid weighing.

The quartz tube that is used to provide an envelope for the inert gas was modified by enlarging the diameter of the central expanded section and by inserting an inner quartz shell. These modifications were intended to lengthen the useful life of the quartz tube.

Standard calibration curves were obtained by using metallic tin standard samples of a known oxygen content that were supplied by the Laboratory Equipment Corporation. The oxygen content of reagent-grade lithium fluoride was assayed as a test determination. The value obtained was 250 plus or minus 40 parts per million based on five determinations.

The method was further tested on samples of lithium fluoride, beryllium fluoride, zirconium tetrafluoride, thorium tetrafluoride, uranium tetrafluoride and were also analyzed by the potassium bromine tetrafluoride method and the triton activation analysis methods.

Although the comparison is not as good as anticipated, the results are in general agreement. Wide spreads are observed; however, in the results of a single method. This was noted previously and is possibly the result of inherent errors in the methods used when applied to fluoride salts, inhomogeneity of the sample, or contamination during sampling and handling in the dry, inert-gas box. The latter has been proved to be a definite cause of error in that the results vary by a factor of 5 in some cases when the sample is deliberately exposed to the atmosphere. It is not possible at this time to eliminate either of the other aforementioned possibilities of error, but efforts are continuing to ascertain the sources of error.

Several methods were tested for the determination of oxygen in graphite. The methods used to date include fluorination with potassium bromine tetrafluoride, inert-gas fusion, vacuum fusion, and neutron activation with 14-megaelectronvolts neutrons. The graphite examined was high-purity material, and the samples varied in weight from 50 to 250 milligram. In the initial tests, the quantity of oxygen obtained by means of the first three procedures was essentially equivalent to the representative blanks for the procedures. Based on the weight of sample used, the oxygen concentration in the graphite was less than 50 parts per million. Considerably larger samples and attendant modifications of the apparatus would be required to establish lower limits of sensitivity. For example, if 1 gram samples were used, the oxygen concentrations as low as 10 parts per million could be determined.

Currently, efforts are being directed toward using the neutron activation technique using 14-megaelectronvolts neutrons generated by the Cockroft-Walton generator. This method is nondestructive and capable of a high sensitivity that depends only on the condition of the tritium target. Oxygen in the graphite undergoes a neutron proton reaction upon irradiation with high-energy neutrons to produce nitrogen 16, which has a 7.3 second half-life. The gamma activity of the nitrogen 16 is counted using a gamma spectrometer and a multichannel analyzer. Special pneumatic transfer of the sample to the counter is necessary to achieve the ultimate sensitivity. Only cursory results have been obtained thus far. It is planned to extend this technique to oxygen determinations in other materials.

Equipment was designed to remove and homogenize radioactive molten salt reactor experiment solid salt samples preparatory to analytical manipulations. The equipment includes a copper pulverizer-mixer and a copper sampling ladle that contains the solidified fuel. The sampling ladle is placed in the pulverizer-mixer, which is agitated on a mixer mill. The fuel is fractured out of the ladle, pulverized into a homogeneous powder, and transferred to a storage bottle. The homogenized fuel sample is then available for analysis.

Work on the detailed design of the fuel-processing system, which consists of a fluorination system for uranium recovery, was started. Equipment in addition to that described previously is now included for treatment of the salt with a mixture of hydrogen and hydrogen fluoride for oxide removal.

In the proposed system, oxide removal is accomplished by sparging the molten salt with an hydrogen gas hydrogen fluoride mixture. The hydrogen gas, water, excess hydrogen fluoride, and some volatile fission products, principally niobium, tellurium, and iodine, are evolved. The 750°F sodium fluoride trap removes the bulk of the niobium. The hydrogen fluoride water mixture is condensed, sampled, and analyzed in order to follow the progress of the treatment. The sample pot is emptied, after sparging, to the caustic tank, where iodine and tellurium are collected. After sufficient decay, the caustic is sent to the liquid-waste tank and the ORNL waste system.

Fluorination of the fuel salt volatilizes some fission products, in addition to uranium hexafluoride but an overall decontamination factor of greater than 10 to the seventh is expected. Additional decontamination from ruthenium, zirconium, and niobium is obtained as the uranium hexafluoride passes through the 750°F sodium fluoride trap. The uranium is collected as uranium hexafluoride 3 sodium fluoride in the 180°F sodium absorbers. These are portable units that will be moved to the Volatility Pilot Plant for desorption and cold trapping. Excess fluorine will be disposed of by reacting it with sulfur dioxide at 400°F. A relatively inert gas sulfuryl fluoride is formed and can be safely sent through the Fiberglas filters and discharged to the stack.

The mixture 30 mole % lithium carbonate, 38 mole % sodium carbonate, and 32 mole % potassium carbonate has been proposed for use in out-of-pile development studies relating to the molten salt reactor experiment on the basis of similarity in properties to those of the molten salt reactor experiment fuel salt. Use of this mixture will ease handling problems because it is essentially noncorrosive to stainless steel without a protective atmosphere. Measurements of the enthalpy and viscosity of this salt are reported here.

A linear fit was selected due to the unusually large scatter in the 30 mole % lithium carbonate, 38 mole % sodium carbonate, and 32 mole % potassium carbonate data. The derived heat capacity is 0.413 calories per gram per degree Celsius. The measurements will be repeated with a freshly prepared sample of the salt mixture in the hope of reducing the experimental scatter and establishing the effect of temperature on the enthalpy and heat capacity.

The viscosity of the 30 mole % lithium carbonate, 38 mole % sodium carbonate and 32 mole % potassium carbonate mixture was determined by efflux-cup measurements.

